Most existing discriminant manifold learning methods aim to maximize the margin among nearby data, which is determined in the high-dimensional original space. As such, they do not necessarily best maximize the margin between different classes in the low-dimensional space, which is a critically important property for image classification. To handle this problem, we propose an adaptive maximum margin analysis (AMMA) for feature extraction. AMMA aims to seek a projection matrix that best maximize the margin, which is calculated in the low- dimensional space. It uses sparse representation to adaptively construct the intrinsic and penalty graphs. Finally, an iterative algorithm is developed to solve the projection matrix. Extensive experimental results on several image databases illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
Multiplicative noise and blur corruptions usually happen in coherent imaging systems, such as the synthetic aperture radar. Total variation regularized multiplicative noise and blur removal models have been widely studied in the literature, which can preserve sharp edges of the recovered images. However, the images recovered from the total variation based models usually suffer from staircase effects. To overcome this deficiency, we propose a total generalized variation regularized convex optimization model. The resulting objective function involves the total generalized variation regularization term, the MAP based data fitting term and a quadratic penalty term which is based on the statistical property of the noise. Indeed, the MAP estimated data fitting term in the multiplicative noise and blur removal model is nonconvex. Under a mild condition, the quadratic penalty term makes the objective function convex. A primal-dual algorithm is developed to solve the minimization problem. Numerical experiments show that the proposed method outperforms some state-of-the-art methods.
Hypernetwork, as a useful representation of natural and social systems has received increasing interests from researchers. Community is crucial to understand the structural and functional properties of the hypernetworks. Here, we propose a new method to uncover the communities of hypernetworks. We construct a Density-Ordered Tree (DOT) to represent original data by combining density and distance, and the community detection in hypernetwork is converted to a DOT partition problem. Then, an anomaly detection strategy using box-plot rule is applied to partition DOT and judge whether there is a significant community structure in the hypernetwork. Moreover, visual inspection as a complementary approach of box-plot rule can effectively improve the effectiveness of community detection. Finally, the method is compared with existing methods in both synthetic and real-world networks.
Analytic two-dark soliton solutions for a variable–coefficient nonlinear Schrödinger equation are obtained via modified Hirota method. Parallel solitons are observed and soliton control such as the soliton compression is realized with different group velocity dispersion profiles. Besides, soliton interactions are investigated with the interaction distance being adjusted. In addition, soliton repulsive structures as well as attractive ones are obtained with exponential dispersion profile. Results in our research may be useful for the soliton control in inhomogeneous optical fibers, which will be a benefit to the realistic optical communication systems.
Artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC) is a relatively new optimization algorithm. However, ABC does well in exploration but badly in exploitation. One possible way to improve the exploitation ability of the algorithm is to combine ABC with other operations. Differential evolution (DE) can be considered as a good choice for this purpose. Based on this consideration, we propose a new algorithm, i.e. DGABC, which combines DE with gbest-guided ABC (GABC) by an evaluation strategy with an attempt to utilize more prior information of the previous search experience to speed up the convergence. In addition, to improve the global convergence, when producing the initial population, a chaotic opposition-based population initialization method is employed. The comparison results on a set of 27 benchmark functions demonstrate that the proposed method has better performance than the other algorithms.
Coordinated path planning for multiple unmanned aerial vehicles (multi-UAVs) is a highly significant problem encountered in their coordinated control. In the interests of completing mission securely and efficiently, the advanced multi-UAVs control technology requires a universal smoothing method as well as a precise coordination strategy. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-UAVs coordinated path planning method based on the k-degree smoothing, a more complex environment consists of multiple threat sources of which is constructed. By employing the Improved Ant Colony Optimization algorithm, a k-degree smoothing method is also presented aiming at obtaining a more flyable path. Additionally, the multi-UAVs coordination algorithm is induced by k-degree smoothing, allowing the UAVs to arrive at the destination simultaneously or in an acceptable time interval. Finally, simulations of the comparison between the Improved Ant Colony Optimization and classic algorithm, the detailed smoothing method, and the coordination are respectively conducted to validate that the proposed approach is feasible and effective in multi-UAVs coordinated path planning problems.
More recently, Chang and Lee proposed a secure single sign-on mechanism to allow mobile users to use the unitary token to access service providers. In this paper, we fist demonstrate that, not as claimed, their scheme is not efficient and thus not suitable for mobile devices in distributed computer networks. Then we employ elliptic curve cryptosystems and proxy signature to design a new scheme. Both the security and performance analysis shows that our scheme is better suited for resource constrained devices.
As a special class of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs) perform important roles in numerous biological and pathological processes. The realization of miRNA functions depends largely on how miRNAs regulate specific target genes. It is therefore critical to identify, analyze, and cross-reference miRNA-target interactions to better explore and delineate miRNA functions. Semantic technologies can help in this regard. We previously developed a miRNA domain-specific application ontology, Ontology for MIcroRNA Target (OMIT), whose goal was to serve as a foundation for semantic annotation, data integration, and semantic search in the miRNA field. In this paper we describe our continuing effort to develop the OMIT, and demonstrate its use within a semantic search system, OmniSearch, designed to facilitate knowledge capture of miRNA-target interaction data. Important changes in the current version OMIT are summarized as: (1) following a modularized ontology design (with 2559 terms imported from the NCRO ontology); (2) encoding all 1884 human miRNAs (vs. 300 in previous versions); and (3) setting up a GitHub project site along with an issue tracker for more effective community collaboration on the ontology development. The OMIT ontology is free and open to all users, accessible at: http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/omit.owl. The OmniSearch system is also free and open to all users, accessible at: http://omnisearch.soc.southalabama.edu/index.php/Software.
Protein solvent accessibility prediction is a pivotal intermediate step towards modeling protein tertiary structures directly from one-dimensional sequences. It also plays an important part in identifying protein folds and domains. Although some methods have been presented to the protein solvent accessibility prediction in recent years, the performance is far from satisfactory. In this work, we propose PredRSA, a computational method that can accurately predict relative solvent accessible surface area (RSA) of residues by exploring various local and global sequence features which have been observed to be associated with solvent accessibility. Based on these features, a novel and efficient approach, Gradient Boosted Regression Trees (GBRT), is first adopted to predict RSA.
Protein solvent accessibility prediction is a pivotal intermediate step towards modeling protein tertiary structures directly from one-dimensional sequences. It also plays an important part in identifying protein folds and domains. Although some methods have been presented to the protein solvent accessibility prediction in recent years, the performance is far from satisfactory. In this work, we propose PredRSA, a computational method that can accurately predict relative solvent accessible surface area (RSA) of residues by exploring various local and global sequence features which have been observed to be associated with solvent accessibility. Based on these features, a novel and efficient approach, Gradient Boosted Regression Trees (GBRT), is first adopted to predict RSA.
All biological processes are inherently dynamic. Biological systems evolve transiently or sustainably according to sequential time points after perturbation by environment insults, drugs and chemicals. Investigating the temporal behavior of molecular events has been an important subject to understand the underlying mechanisms governing the biological system in response to, such as, drug treatment. The intrinsic complexity of time series data requires appropriate computational algorithms for data interpretation. In this study, we propose, for the first time, the application of dynamic topic models (DTM) for analyzing time-series gene expression data.
Anguilla japonica (Japanese eel) is currently one of the most important research subjects in eastern Asia aquaculture. Enigmatic life cycle of the organism makes study of artificial reproduction extremely limited. Henceforth genomic and transcriptomic resources of eels are urgently needed to help solving the problems surrounding this organism across multiple fields. We hereby provide a reconstructed transcriptome from deep sequencing of juvenile (glass eels) whole body samples. The provided expressed sequence tags were used to annotate the currently available draft genome sequence. Homologous information derived from the annotation result was applied to improve the group of scaffolds into available linkage groups.
This paper presents a minimum void length scale control method for structural topology optimization. Void length scale control has been actively investigated for decades, which intends to ensure the topology design manufacturable given the machining tool access. However, only a single lower bound has been applied in existing methods, which does not fit the multi-stage rough-to-finish machining. To fix this issue, the proposed minimum void length scale control method employs double lower bounds which corresponds to the rough and finish machining operations, respectively. This method has been implemented under the level set framework. For technical details, the rough machining lower bound is satisfied by developing a signed distance-related constraint, which ensures enough space for the rough machining tool movement and thus, guarantees the machining efficiency. The finish machining lower bound is addressed through the curvature flow control, which ensures the small features manufacturable and also a good finish dimension and surface. Through a few numerical case studies, it is proven that the minimum void length scale can be effectively controlled without sacrificing much of the structural performance.
This work proposes a novel Adaptive Instruction Codec Architecture (AICA) for network-on-chip (NoC) that improves channel utilization to transfer packets and flits, in order to solve issues of power consumption and throughput. The proposed architecture allows multiple packets to be stuffed into a single packet, and thus can transfer more packets than other network interface (NI) in one time unit. Reducing the number of packets for transmission allows the channel to be reused to transfer additional messages, thus improving channel throughput. This architecture reduces the number of packets transmitted, thus indirectly alleviating the deadlock problem. Many repeating and similar instructions are frequently transferred in NoC. The proposed AICA reduces transmission redundancy, and supports process elements (PE) with 16-bit or 64-bit core CPU. Experimental results show that the proposed architecture and algorithms delivers improvement of up to 48.1% on power consumption, and 46.3% on throughput.
Representing rotational symmetry vector as a set of vectors is not suitable for design due to lacking of a consistent ordering for measurement. In this paper we introduce a spectral method to find rotation invariant harmonic functions for symmetry vector field design. This method is developed for 3D vector fields, but it is applicable in 2D. Given the finite symmetry group G of a symmetry vector field v(x) on a 3D domain Ω, we formulate the harmonic function h(s) as a stationary point of group G. Using the real spherical harmonic (SH) bases, we showed the coefficients of the harmonic functions are an eigenvector of the SH rotation matrices corresponding to group G. Instead of solving eigen problems to obtain the eigenvector, we developed a forward constructive method based on orthogonal group theory. The harmonic function found by our method is not only invariant under G, but also expressive and can distinguish different rotations with respect to G. At last, we demonstrate some vector field design results with tetrahedron-symmetry, cube-symmetry and dodecahedron-symmetry groups.
