Received May 30, 2016, accepted June 13, 2016, date of publication August 8, 2016, date of current version November 18, 2016.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2590500

A Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future
of Computer Games
WEI CAI1 , (Member, IEEE), RYAN SHEA2 , (Member, IEEE),
CHUN-YING HUANG3 , (Member, IEEE), KUAN-TA CHEN4 , (Senior Member, IEEE),
JIANGCHUAN LIU2 , (Senior Member, IEEE), VICTOR C. M. LEUNG1 , (Fellow, IEEE),
AND CHENG-HSIN HSU5 , (Senior Member, IEEE)

1 Department

of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada
of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
4 Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan
5 Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
2 School

3 Department

Corresponding author: C.-H. Hsu (chsu@cs.nthu.edu.tw)
This work was supported in part by the University of British Columbia through the Four Year Doctoral Fellowship, in part by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under Grant STPGP 447524, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 61271182, in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under Grant 102-2221-E-007-062-MY3,
Grant 103-2221-E-009-230-MY2, Grant 104-2221-E-009-200-MY3, and Grant 103-2221-E-001-023-MY2, in part by an NSERC E.W.R.
Steacie Memorial Fellowship, in part by an NSERC Strategic Project Grant, and in part by a Discovery Grant.

ABSTRACT Cloud gaming is a new way to deliver high-quality gaming experience to gamers anywhere and
anytime. In cloud gaming, sophisticated game software runs on powerful servers in data centers, rendered
game scenes are streamed to gamers over the Internet in real time, and the gamers use light-weight software
executed on heterogeneous devices to interact with the games. Due to the proliferation of high-speed
networks and cloud computing, cloud gaming has attracted tremendous attentions in both the academia and
industry since late 2000’s. In this paper, we survey the latest cloud gaming research from different aspects,
spanning over cloud gaming platforms, optimization techniques, and commercial cloud gaming services.
The readers will gain the overview of cloud gaming research and get familiar with the recent developments
in this area.
INDEX TERMS Clouds, distributed computing, video coding, quality of service, computer graphics.

I. INTRODUCTION

Cloud gaming refers to a new way to deliver computer
games to users, where computationally complex games are
executed on powerful cloud servers, the rendered game
scenes are streamed over the Internet to gamers with thin
clients on heterogeneous devices, and the control events from
input devices are sent back to cloud servers for interactions.
Figure 1 presents how cloud gaming services work. In the
cloud, a cloud gaming platform is hosted on cloud servers
in one or multiple data centers. The cloud gaming platform
runs computer game programs, which can be roughly divided
into two major components: (i) game logic that is responsible
to convert gamer commands into in-game interactions, and
(ii) scene renderer that generates game scenes in real-time.
The gamer commands come from the command interpreter,
and the game scenes are captured by video capturer into
videos, which are then compressed by video encoder. The
command interpreter, video capturer, and video encoder are
VOLUME 4, 2016

all implemented as parts of the cloud gaming platform.
As shown in this figure, the cloud gaming platform sends the
video frames to, and receives user inputs from thin clients
used by gamers for playing games. It is a thin client, because
only two low-complexity components are required: (i) command receiver, which connects to the game controllers, such
as gampads, joysticks, keyboards, and mouses, and (ii) video
decoder, which can be realized using massively produced
(inexpensive) decoder chips. The communications between
the cloud game platform and thin clients are over the besteffort Internet, which in turn makes supporting real-time
computer games quite challenging.
In late 2000’s, we started to see cloud gaming services
offered by startups, such as OnLive [67], Gaikai [27],
G-cluster [26], and Ubitus [93]. We also witnessed that Gaikai
was acquired by SONY, which is a major game console developer [86]. This was followed by the competition between
Sony’s PlayStation Now (PS Now) [68] and Nvidia’s Grid

2169-3536 
 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7605

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

FIGURE 1. Typical cloud gaming services.

Game Streaming Service [65], which further heats up the
cloud gaming market. In fact, a 2014 report from Strategy
Analytics [75] indicates that the number of cloud gaming
users increases from 30 millions in 2014 to 150 millions
in 2015. The same report also predicts that other leading
game console manufactures will soon join the cloud gaming
market.
The tremendous popularity of cloud gaming may be
attributed to several potential advantages to gamers, game
developers, and service providers. For gamers, cloud gaming
enables them to: (i) have access to their games anywhere and
anytime, (ii) purchase or rent games on-demand, (iii) avoid
regularly upgrading their hardware, and (iv) enjoy unique features such as migrating across client computers during game
sessions, observing ongoing tournaments, and sharing game
replays with friends. For game developers, cloud gaming
allows them to: (i) concentrate on a single platform, which in
turn reduces the porting and testing costs, (ii) bypass retailers
for higher profit margins, (iii) reach out to more gamers, and
(iv) avoid piracy as the game software is never downloaded
to client computers. For service providers, cloud gaming:
(i) leads to new business models, (ii) creates more demands on
already-deployed cloud resources, and (iii) demonstrates the
potential of other/new remote execution applications, since
cloud gaming imposes the strictest constraints on various
computing and networking resources.
Despite the great opportunities of cloud gaming,
several crucial challenges must be addressed by the research
community before it reaches its full potentials to attract more
gamers, game developers, and service providers. We summarize the most important aspect as follows. First, cloud gaming
platforms and testbeds must be built up for comprehensive
7606

performance evaluations. The evaluations include measurements on Quality of Service (QoS) metrics, such as energy
consumption and network metrics, and Quality of Experience (QoE) metrics, such as gamer perceived experience.
Building platforms and testbeds, designing the test scenarios,
and carrying out the evaluations, require significant efforts,
while analyzing the complex interplay between QoS and QoE
metrics is even more difficult.
Second, the resulting platforms and evaluation procedures
allow the research community to optimize various components, such as cloud servers and communication channels.
More specifically, optimization techniques for: (i) better
resource allocation and distributed architecture are possible
at cloud servers, and (ii) optimal content coding and adaptive
transmissions are possible in communication channels.
Third, computer games are of various game genres [19].
These genres can be categorized on the basis of two elements:
viewpoint and theme. Viewpoint is how a gamer observe
the game scene. It determines the variability of rendered
video on the screen. Most commonly seen viewpoints include
first-person, second-person, third-person, and omnipresent.
First-person games adopt graphical perspectives rendered
from the viewpoint of the in-game characters, such as in
Counter-Strike. Second-person games are rendered from the
back of the in-game characters, so that gamers can see the
characters on the screen, like in Grand Theft Auto. Thirdperson games fix the gamers’ views on 3D scenes, projected
onto 2D spaces. Modern third-person games usually adopts
the sky view, also known as God view. Classic third-person
games include Diablo, Command & Conquer, FreeStyle,
and etc. Last, omnipresent enables gamers to fully control
views on the region of interest (RoI) from different angels
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

and distances. Many recent war games, e.g., Age of
Empires 3, Stronghold 2, and Warcraft III, fall into this category. Game theme determines how gamers interact with game
content. Common themes include shooting, fighting, sports,
turn-based role-playing (RPG), action role-playing (ARPG),
turn-based strategy, real-time strategy (RTS), and management simulation. Although the viewpoint may be restricted by
game theme, but generally a game genre can be describe by
a pair of viewpoint and theme, such as first-person shooting,
third-person ARPG, omnipresent RTS, and etc. Among them,
fast-paced first-person shooting games impose the highest
scene complexity, which are the most challenging games
for cloud gaming service providers. In contrast, third-person
turn-based RPG games are least sensitive to delays and thus
more suitable for cloud gaming.
Cloud gaming is an exciting research area and the existing
literature aims to address several aforementioned challenges.
Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive survey on cloud gaming research. The lack of
a central survey of existing literature may delay or even
prevent researchers, who are interested in cloud gaming or
other remote execution applications, from joining the community. A thorough understanding and exploration of existing
academic and industrial research and development can help
lead to the building of future cloud gaming platforms. One
such advance might come from future games being designed
specifically with cloud gaming functionalities and supports in
mind. How we accomplish this is still an open question, for
example game developers could create cloud gaming aware
contexts or even whole new programing paradigms. With this
in mind, we carefully connect existing research on solving
current challenges together, and come up with a classification
system described below.
A. SCOPE AND CLASSIFICATIONS

In the current article, we survey the cloud gaming literature. We first collect representative cloud gaming papers, and
group them into several classifications. We emphasize that
only a selective set of papers are surveyed, in order to give
the readers better understanding on the landscape of the cloud
gaming research. Upon selecting the representative papers,
we propose a classification system as summarized in Figure 2.
More details on the classification system follow.
1) Cloud Gaming Overview (Section II): We survey
the overview, introductory, and positioning papers on
either general cloud gaming, or specialized topics,
such as mobile cloud gaming and Game-as-a-Service
(GaaS).
2) Cloud Gaming Platforms (Section III): We
consider papers that construct basic cloud gaming
platforms, which support different performance evaluation methodologies. These studies can be further
categorized into three groups: system integration, QoS
evaluations, and QoE evaluations.
a) System Integration (Section III-A): The fundamental step of cloud gaming research, like many
VOLUME 4, 2016

other systems areas, is to put up basic platforms,
based on existing tools. We summarize such
system integration efforts, which serve as cornerstones of related research.
b) Quality of Service Evaluations (Section III-B):
We survey the studies on objective metric evaluations, which algorithmically quantify the system
performance, i.e., without subject assessments.
Existing papers focus on two types of objective metrics, Energy Consumption and Network
Metrics. The energy consumption is critical to
mobile cloud gaming clients, in order to prolong the precious battery life. There are several
network metrics affecting the gamer experience,
and interaction latency is a representative network metric. The interaction latency refers to the
time difference between a gamer input and the
corresponding game scene update on the client
computer. Because gamers are highly sensitive to
interaction latency [19], its measurement methodologies draw a lot of attentions in the literature.
c) Quality
of
Experience
Evaluations
(Section III-C): We discuss the papers on subjective metric evaluations, which are based on user
studies, where subject gamers give opinion scores
to their cloud gaming experience. Conducting
user studies is inherently expensive and tedious,
and thus most QoE studies attempt to analyze the
relationship between the QoS and QoE metrics.
The resulting models may in turn be used to
optimize cloud gaming platforms.
3) Optimizing Cloud Gaming Platforms (Section IV):
We consider papers that optimize cloud gaming platforms from specific aspects; usually each work focuses
on optimizing one or a few components. Such studies
can be further categorized into two groups: cloud server
infrastructure and communications.
a) Cloud Server Infrastructure (Section IV-A):
The existing studies on optimizing cloud server
infrastructure are surveyed. Several papers study
the Resource Allocation problem of server and
network resources among multiple data centers,
server nodes, and game clients to optimize the
overall cloud gaming experience, where diverse
criteria are considered. Other papers optimize
the Distributed Architectures of cloud gaming
platforms, e.g., using Peer-to-Peer (P2P) overlays
or multi-tier clouds for better performance and
scalability.
b) Communications (Section IV-B): We survey
the existing work on optimizing the efficiency of
content streaming over the dynamic and heterogeneous communication channels. These studies
are further classified into two groups. First,
several papers consider the problem of Data
Compression, e.g., layered coding and graphics
7607

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

FIGURE 2. Our proposed classification system of cloud gaming papers.

compression are proposed, which may outperform the conventional 2D image compression in
certain environments. Second, there are papers
on Adaptive Transmission, which cope with the
network dynamics by continuously changing various parameters, such as encoding bitrate, frame
rate, and image resolution. The same adaptive
transmissions may also be used to absorb the
negative impacts due to insufficient resources on
cloud servers and game clients.
4) Commercial Cloud Gaming Services (Section V):
We survey the representative commercial cloud gaming services, and classify them along different aspects.
We also discuss the advantages and disadvantage of
different cloud gaming services.
In the rest of this article, we survey the four classes of
papers in Sections II–V. They are followed by Section VI,
which concludes the survey.
II. CLOUD GAMING OVERVIEW PAPERS

As a promising cloud service provisioning paradigm, cloud
gaming has attracted interests from prominent research teams
all over the world. These teams have shared their thoughts
7608

and ideas on cloud gaming from their viewpoints in several
high-level overview papers. In this section, we survey and
summarize the representative papers along this direction. Our
concise summary puts readers into the context of cloud gaming research, while interested readers may find new research
directions in the surveyed overview papers.
Ross [74] is the first literature that introduces the cloud
gaming model to the academia in 2009, nine years after the
G-cluster’s demonstration of cloud gaming technology at E3.
The author describes gaming as cloud computing’s killer app
and depicts the blueprint of novel gaming delivery paradigm,
proposed by Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), which renders
games’ scene videos, compresses them, and transmit them to
the gamers through the Internet. This approach enables online
gamers to offload their graphic rendering tasks to the cloud,
thus, eliminates the computational workload on gamers’ local
platforms. This is the most popular definition of cloud gaming
adopted by most of the research work in this area. However,
a recent publication [59] provides a more general definition,
by envisioning the cloud gaming system as a novel computer
architecture that leverages cloud resources to improve gaming
performance, such as rendering, response time, precision and
fairness. The authors distribute system workload to multiple
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

cloud servers and game clients to enable this vision. For a
further step, Cai et al. [4] explore the essence of cloud games
as inter-dependent components, thus, define cloud gaming as
utilizing cloud resources to host gaming components, thereby
reducing workload at gamers’ local platforms and increasing the overall system performance. According to different
integration approach of the cloud, the authors identify and
discuss the research directions of three cloud gaming architectures, which are Remote Rendering, Local Rendering, and
Cognitive Resource Allocation.
After the official launch of OnLive in March 2010,
the business model for cloud gaming becomes a hot topic
in research society. Riungu-kalliosaari et al. [73] conduct
interviews in small and medium size gaming companies to
qualitatively study the adoption dynamics of cloud computing. With grounded theory method, the authors observe that
the concept of cloud gaming are relatively well-known in the
industry, while gaming organizations still hesitate in adopting
cloud computing services and technologies due to the lack of
clear business models and success stories. To this end, Ojala
and Tyrvainen [66] start their investigations on developing
business models for cloud gaming services. As a case study
for Software as a Service (SaaS), the authors select G-cluster,
one of famous cloud gaming companies, and study its business model over five years from 2005 to 2010. They conclude
that, over time, the business model in cloud gaming becomes
simpler and has fewer actors, which increases the revenue
per gamer. In addition, they also expect the cloud gaming
solution will make illegal copying practically impossible.
Another work [61] considers the convergence of mobile cloud
in gaming industry from a business model proposition. The
authors discuss the first sketch of a possible business model of
Kusanagi project, a proposed end-to-end infrastructure, from
domains of service, technology, organization, and financial,
while compare these domains of three cloud examples, i.e.,
G-cluster, Gaikai, and OnLive.
During the decade of development, there have been cloud
gaming systems and services in the market. A number of
positioning papers consider these systems and envision the
opportunities, challenges, and directions in this area. The
literature, e.g., [4], [11], [17], [23], [59], [85], [100], covers
both the commercial and academic platforms, while their
concerns of open issues are greatly overlapped in the topics of
response time minimization, graphical video encoding, network aware adaption, QoE optimization, and cloud resource
management.
Besides of these common focuses, each research team
has particular interests and directions. Dey [23] concentrate
on developing device aware scalable applications, which
involve open issues of extending cloud to wireless networks.
Soliman et al. [85] briefly discuss related legal issues, including patents, ownership concerns, guaranteed service levels,
and pricing schemes. In contrast, piracy and hacking may no
long be an issue, since the executable game program will
not be delivered to the gamers. Wu [100] explores cloud
gaming architecture from the aspect of cloud computing’s
VOLUME 4, 2016

three layers, i.e., IaaS, SaaS and PaaS. The author identifies security as a potential challenge in cloud gaming, especially data protection and location. Cai et al. [4] investigate
the features of different game genres and identify their
impact on cloud gaming system design. In addition, they
provide a vision on GaaS provisioning for mobile devices.
Mishra et al. [59] explain how to enhance the quality of
online gaming by integrating techniques from cloud gaming
research communities. Featured topics include the interplay
between QoS and QoE metrics, game models, and cloud
expansion. Chen et al. [11] point out some unique research
directions in cloud gaming, such as game integration, visualization, user interface, server selection, and resource scheduling. Chuan et al. [17] study cloud gaming from a green media
perspective. They discuss the major cloud gaming subsystems with green designs, which include a cloud data centre,
graphics rendering modules, video compression techniques,
and network delivery methods.
In addition to these high-level studies, more cloud gaming
papers focus on individual research problems. We divide
them into several classifications and survey them in the
following sections.
III. CLOUD GAMING PLATFORMS

This section presents the work related to cloud gaming platforms in three steps: (i) integrated cloud gaming platforms
for complete prototype systems, (ii) measurement studies on
QoS metrics, and (iii) measurement studies on QoE metrics.
A. SYSTEM INTEGRATION

Providing an easy-to-use platform for (cloud) game
developers is very challenging. This is because of the complex, distributed, and heterogeneous nature of the cloud
gaming platforms. In fact, there is a clear tradeoff between
development complexity and optimization room. Platforms
opt for very low (or even no) additional development complexity may suffer from limited room for optimization, which
are referred to as transparent platforms that run unmodified games. In contrast, other platforms opt for more optimized performance at the expense of requiring additional
development complexity, such as code augmentation and
recompilation, which are called non-transparent platforms.
These two classes of cloud gaming platforms have advantages
and disadvantages, and we describe representative studies in
individual classes below.
The transparent platforms ease the burden of deploying
new games on cloud gaming platforms, at the expense of
potentially suboptimal performance. Depasquale et al. [22]
present a cloud gaming platform based on the RemoteFX
extension of Windows remote desktop protocol. Modern Windows servers leverage GPUs and Hyper-V virtual
machines to enable various remote applications, including
cloud games. Their experiments reveal that RemoteFX allows
Windows servers to better adapt to network dynamics, but
still suffers from high frame loss rate and inferior responsiveness. Kim et al. [44] propose another cloud gaming platform,
7609

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

which consists of a distributed service platform, a distributed
rendering system, and an encoding/streaming system. Their
platform supports isolated audio/video capturing, multiple
clients, and browser-based clients. Real experiments with
40 subjects have been done, showing high responsiveness.
Both Depasquale et al. [22] and Kim et al. [44] are proprietary
platforms, and are less suitable for cloud gaming research.
GamingAnywhere [38], [40] is the first open source transparent cloud gaming platform. Its design principles can be
summarized as extensive, portable, configurable, and open.
The GamingAnywhere server supports Windows and Linux,
and the GamingAnywhere client runs on Windows, Linux,
Mac OS, and Android. It is shown that GamingAnywhere
outperforms several commercial/proprietary cloud gaming
platforms, and has been used and enhanced in several cloud
gaming studies in the literature. For example, Hong et al. [35]
develop adaptation algorithms for multiple gamers, to maximize the gamer experience. In addition to: (i) a user study
to map cloud gaming parameters to gamer experience and
(ii) optimization algorithms for resource allocation, they also
enhance GamingAnywhere [38], [40] to support on-the-fly
adaption of frame rate and bitrate.
The non-transparent platforms require augmenting and
recompiling existing games to leverage unique features
for better gaming experience, which may potentially be
time-consuming, expensive, and error-prone. For example,
current games can be ported to Google’s Native Client technology [62], [63] or to Mozilla’s asm.js language [1], [24].
Several other studies focus on integrating new techniques
with cloud gaming platforms for better gaming experience.
Nan et al. [64] propose a joint video and graphics streaming
system for higher coding efficiency as well. Moreover, they
present a rate adaptation algorithm to further minimize the
bandwidth consumption. Lee et al. [48], [49] present a system
to improve the responsiveness of mobile cloud gaming by
compensating network delay. In particular, their system prerenders potential future frames based on some prediction
algorithm and delivers the rendered frames to mobile clients
when the network conditions are good. These frames are
then used to compensate late video frames due to unstable networks. They integrate the proposed system with two
open source games, and conduct a user study of 23 subjects. The subjects report good gaming experience under
nontrivial network delay, as high as 250 ms. Cai et al. [3]
build a prototype platform for decomposed cloud gaming,
and rigorously address several system issues, which were not
thoroughly investigated in their earlier work [4]. Their main
contribution is the very first cognitive cloud gaming platform
that automatically adapts to distributive workload in run-time,
in order to optimally utilize distributed resources (on different entities, like cloud servers, in-network computing nodes,
and gamers’ local platforms) for the best gamer experience.
On the resulting platform, several games are developed and
empirically evaluated, demonstrating the potentials of cognitive cloud gaming platforms. Several enhancements on such
a platform are still possible, such as implementing more
7610

sophisticated games, supporting more gamers, and providing
more completed SDK (Software Development Kit) to cloud
game developers.
B. QUALITY OF SERVICE EVALUATIONS

Performing QoS measurements is crucial for quantifying the
performance of the cloud gaming platforms. Moreover, doing
so in real-time allows us to effectively troubleshoot and even
to dynamically optimize the cloud gaming platforms. The
QoS related cloud gaming papers are roughly categorized into
two classes: (i) energy consumption and (ii) network metrics.
They are surveyed in the following.
1) ENERGY CONSUMPTION

Games have been known to push consumer computing platforms to their maximum capacity. In traditional systems such
as desktop computers, it is often expected and accepted that
Game software will push a system to its limits. However,
mobile environments are in a strikingly different scenario
as they have limited power reserves. A fully utilized mobile
device may have a greatly reduced running time, thus it is
important to reduce the complexity of these game software
for mobile devices. Luckily, cloud gaming systems provide
a potential way forward by offloading complicated processing tasks such as 3D rendering and physics calculations
to powerful cloud servers. However, cares must be taken
because the decoding of video, especially high definition
video is far from a trivial task. We will cover some pioneering
work [29], [39], [91] that has been done on this important
subject.
Hans et al. [29] systematically test the energy
performance of their in-house cloud gaming server
MCGS.KOM on real world tablets. They find that when
WLAN was used as the access network, cloud game software
could save between 12% and 38% of energy use, depending
on the types of games and tablets. Explorations on important
energy saving coding parameters for H.264/AVC are reported
in Taher et al. [91]. Further, Huang et al. [39] explore the
energy consumption of the cloud gaming video decoders. The
researchers found that frame rate has the largest impact on the
decoders energy consumption, with bit rate and resolution
also being major contributors. Moreover, Shea et al. [79]
explore the performance and energy implications of combing
cloud gaming systems with live broadcasting systems such as
Twitch.
2) NETWORK METRICS

Like many other distributed multimedia applications, user
experience highly depends on network conditions. Therefore,
evaluating different network metrics in cloud gaming is crucial, and we present detailed survey below.
Claypool [18] measures the contents variety of different game genres in details. 28 games from 4 perspectives,
including First-Person Linear, Third-Person Linear, ThirdPerson Isometric, and Omnipresent, are selected to analyze
their scene complexity and motion, indicated by average
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

Intra-coded Block Size (IBS) and Percentage of
Forward/backward or Intra-coded Macroblocks (PFIM),
respectively. Measurements conducted by the author suggest
that Microsoft’s remote desktop achieves better bitrate than
NoMachine’s NX client, while NX client has higher frame
rate. A following work [21] investigates OnLive’s network
characteristics, such as the data size and frequency being sent
and the overall downlink and uplink bitrates. The authors
reveal that the high downlink bitrates of OnLive games are
very similar to those of live videos, nevertheless, OnLive’s
uplink bitrates are much more moderate, which are comparable to traditional game uplink traffic. They also indicate
that the game traffic features are similar for three types
of game genres, including First-Person, Third-Person, and
Omnipresent, while the total bitrates can vary by as much
as 50%. Another important finding is that OnLive does not
demonstrate its ability in adapting bitrate and frame rates to
network latency.
Chen et al. [10] analyze a cloud gaming system’s response
delays and segment it into three components, including network delay, processing delay, and playout delay. With this
decomposition, the authors propose a methodology to measure the latency components and apply the methodology
on OnLive and StreamMyGame, two of the popular cloud
gaming platforms. The authors identify that OnLive system
outperforming StreamMyGame in terms of latency, due to the
different resource provisioning strategy based on game genres. A following work [9] by the same group extend the model
by adding game delay, which represents the latency introduced by the game program to process commands and render
the next video frame of the game scene. They also study
how system design and selective parameters affect responsiveness, including scene complexity, updated region sizes,
screen resolutions, and computation power. Their observation
in network traffics are inline with previous work conducted
by Claypool et al. [21]. Lower network quality, including
the higher packet loss rate and insufficient bandwidth, will
impose negative impacts on both of OnLive and StreamMyGame, resulting lower frame rates and worse graphic
quality. Moreover, by quantifying the streaming quality, the
authors further reveal that OnLive implements an algorithm
to adapt its frame rate to the network delay, while StreamMyGame doesn’t.
Manzano et al. [55] collect and compare network traffic
traces of OnLive and Gaikai, including packet inter-arrival
times, packet size, and packet inter-departure time, to observe
the difference between cloud gaming and traditional online
gaming from the perspectives of network load and traffic
characteristics. The authors reveal that the package size distributions between the two platforms are similar, while the
packet inter-arrival times are distinct. Afterwards, Manzano
et al. [56] claim to be the first research work on specific
network protocols used by cloud gaming platforms. They
focus on conducting a reverse engineering study on OnLive,
based on extensive traffic traces of several games. The authors
further propose a per-flow traffic model for OnLive,
VOLUME 4, 2016

which can be used for network dimensioning, planning optimization, and other studies.
Shea et al. [81] measure the interaction delay and image
quality of OnLive system, under diverse games, computers,
and network configurations. The authors conclude that cloud
procedure introduces 100 to 120 ms latency to the overall
system, which requires further developments in both video
encoders and streaming software. Meanwhile, the impacts of
compression mechanism on video quality are quite noticeable, especially under the circumstances with lower available
bandwidth. They later present an experimental study [80]
on the performance of existing commercial games and raytracing applications with graphical processing units (GPUs).
According to their analysis, gaming applications in virtualized environments demonstrate poorer performance than the
instances executing in non-virtualized bare-metal baseline.
Detailed hardware profiling further reveals that the passthrough access introduces memory bottleneck, especially for
those games with real-time interactions. Another work [36],
however, observes more advanced virtualization technologies
such as mediated pass-through maintain high performance
in virtualized environments. In the authors’ measurement
work, rendering with virtualized GPUs may achieves better
performance than direct pass-through ones. In addition, if the
system adopts software video coding, the CPU may became
the bottleneck, while hypervisor will no longer be the constraint of the system performance. Based on these analysis,
the authors conclude that current virtualization techniques are
already good enough for cloud gaming.
Suznjevic et al. [89] measure 18 games on GamingAnywhere [38] to analyze the correlation between the characteristics of the games played and their network traffic. The
authors observe the highest values for motion, action game
and shooter games, while the majority of strategy games are
relatively low. In contrast, for spatial metrics the situation is
reversed. They also conclude that the bandwidth usage for
most games are within the range of 3 and 4 Mbit/s, except the
strategy games that consume less network resources. Another
notable finding is that, gamers’ action rate will introduce a
slight packet rate increase, but will not affect the generated
network traffic volume.
Lampe et al. [46] conduct experimental evaluations of userperceived latency in cloud games and locally executed video
games. Their results, produced by a semi-automatic measurement tool called GALAMETO.KOM, indicate that cloud
gaming introduces additional latency to game programs,
which is approximately 85% to 800% higher than local executions. This work also features the significant impact of roundtrip time. The measurement results confirm the hypothesis
that the geographical placement of cloud data centres is an
important element in determining response delay, specifically
when the cloud gaming services are accessed through cellular
networks.
Xue et al. [102] conduct a passive and active measurement study for CloudUnion, a Chinese cloud gaming system. The authors characterize the platform from the aspects
7611

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

of architecture, traffic pattern, user behaviour, frame rate
and gaming latency. Observations include: (i) CloudUnion
adopts a geo-distributed infrastructure; (ii) CloudUnion suffers from a queuing problem with different locations from
time to time; (iii) the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) outperforms the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) in terms
of response delay while sacrificing the video quality; and
(iv) CloudUnion adopts conservative video rate recommendation strategy. By comparing CloudUnion and GamingAnywhere [38], the authors observe four common problems. First,
the uplink and downlink data rates are asymmetric. Second,
low-motion games perceive a periodical jitter at the interval
of 10 seconds. Third, audio and video streams are suffering
from synchronization problem. Fourth, packet loss in network
transmission degrades gaming experiences significantly.
C. QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE EVALUATIONS

Measuring and modeling cloud gaming QoE are no easy tasks
because QoE metrics are subjective. In particular, enough
subjects need to be recruited, and time-consuming, tedious,
and expensive user studies need to be carried out. After
that, practical models to relate the QoS and QoE metrics
need to be proposed, trained, and evaluated. Only when the
resulting models are validated with large datasets, they can be
employed in actual cloud gaming platforms. Cloud gaming
QoE has been studied in the literature and can be categorized
into two classes: (i) general cloud gaming QoE evaluations,
and (ii) mobile cloud gaming QoE evaluations, which are
tailored for mobile cloud games, where mobile devices are
resource constrained and vulnerable to inferior wireless network conditions. We survey the related work in these two
classes below.
Chang et al. [8] present a measurement and modeling
methodology on cloud gaming QoE using three popular
remote desktop systems. Their experiment results reveal that
the QoE (in gamer performance) is a function of frame rate
and graphics quality, and the actual functions are derived
using regression. They also show that different remote desktop systems lead to quite diverse QoE levels under the same
network conditions. Jarschel et al. [42] present a testbed
for a user study on cloud gaming services. Mean Opinion
Score (MOS) values are used as the QoE metrics, and the
resulting MOS values are found to depend on QoS parameters, such as network delay and packet loss, and context, such
as game genres and gamer skills. Their survey also indicates
that very few gamers are willing to commit themselves in a
monthly fee plan for cloud gaming. Hence, better business
models are critical to long-term success of cloud gaming.
Möller et al. [60] also conduct a subjective test in the labs,
and consider 7 different MOS values: input sensitivity, video
quality, audio quality, overall quality, complexity, pleasantness, and perceived value. They observe complex interplays
among QoE metrics, QoS metrics, testbed setup, and software
implementation. For example, the rate control algorithm
implemented in cloud gaming client is found to interfere
with the bandwidth throttled by a traffic shaper. Several open
7612

issues are raised after analyzing the results of the user study,
partially due to the limited number of participants.
Slivar et al. [84] carry out a user study of in-home cloud gaming, i.e., the cloud gaming servers and clients are connected
over a LAN. Several insights are revealed, e.g., switching
from a standard game client to in-home cloud gaming client
leads to QoE degradation, measured in MOS values. Moreover, more skilled gamers are less satisfied with in-home
cloud gaming. Hossain et al. [37] adopt gamer emotion as
a QoE metric and study how several screen effects affect
gamer emotion. Sample screen effects include adjusting:
(i) redness, (ii) blueness, (iii) greenness, (iv) brightness, and
(v) contrast; and the goal of applying these screen effects
is to mitigate negative gamer emotion. They then perform
QoE optimization after deriving an empirical model between
screen effects and gamer emotion.
Some other QoE studies focus on the response delay, which
is probably the most crucial performance metric in cloud
gaming, where servers may be geographically far away from
clients. Lee et al. [50] find that response delay imposes
different levels of implications on QoE with different game
genres. They also develop a model to capture this implication
as a function of gamer inputs and game scene dynamics.
Quax et al. [71] make similar conclusions after conducting
extensive experiments, e.g., gamers playing action games
are more sensitive to high responsive delay. Claypool and
Finkel [20] perform user studies to understand the objective
and subjective effects of network latency on cloud gaming.
They find that both MOS values and gamer performance
degrade linearly with network latency. Moreover, cloud gaming is very sensitive to network latency, similar to the traditional first-person avatar games. Raaen [72] designs a user
study to quantify the smallest response delay that can be
detected by gamers. It is observed that some gamers can
perceive < 40 ms response delay, and half of the gamers
cannot tolerate ≥ 100 ms response delay.
Huang et al. [41] perform extensive cloud gaming
experiments using both mobile and desktop clients. Their
work reveals several interesting insights. For example,
gamers’ satisfaction on mobile clients are more related to
graphics quality, while the case on desktop clients is more
correlated to control quality. Furthermore, graphics and
smoothness quality are significantly affected by the bitrate,
frame rate, and network latency, while the control quality
is determined only by the client types (mobile or desktop).
Wang and Dey [94], [97] build a mobile cloud gaming testbed
in their lab for subjective tests. They propose a Game Mean
Opinion Score (GMOS) model, which is a function of game
genre, streaming configuration, measured Peak Signal-toNoise Ratio (PSNR), network latency, and packet loss. The
derivations of model parameters are done via offline regression, and the resulting models can be used for optimizing
mobile cloud gaming experience. Along this line,
Liu et al. [54] propose a Cloud Mobile Rendering–Mean
Opinion Score (CMR-MOS) model, which is a variation of GMOS. CMR-MOS has been used in selecting
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

detail levels of remote rendering applications, like cloud
games.
IV. OPTIMIZING CLOUD GAMING PLATFORMS

This section surveys optimization studies on cloud gaming
platforms, which are further divided into two classes: (i) cloud
server infrastructure and (ii) communications.
A. CLOUD SERVER INFRASTRUCTURE

To cope with the staggering demands from the massive
number of cloud gaming users, carefully-designed cloud
server infrastructures are required for high-quality, robust,
and sustainable cloud gaming services. Cloud server infrastructures can be optimized by: (i) intelligently allocating
resources among servers or (ii) creating innovative distributed
structures. We detail these two types of work in the following.
1) RESOURCE ALLOCATION

The amount of resources allocated to high performance
multimedia applications such as cloud gaming continues to
grow in both public and private data centers. The high demand
and utilization patterns of these platforms make the smart
allocation of these resources paramount to the efficiency of
both public and private clouds. From Virtual Machine (VM)
placement to shared GPUs, researchers from many areas have
been exploring how to efficiently use the cloud to host cloud
gaming platforms. We now explore the important work done
in this area to facilitate efficient deployment of cloud gaming
platforms.
Critical work has been done on both VM placement and
cloud scheduling to facilitate better quality of cloud gaming
services. For example, Wang et al. [98] show that, with proper
scheduling of cloud instances, cloud gaming servers could be
made wireless networking aware. Simulations of their proposed scheduler show the potential of increased performance
and decreased costs for cloud gaming platforms. Researchers
also explore making resource provisioning cloud gaming
aware. For example, a novel QoE aware VM placement strategy for cloud gaming is developed [33]. Further, research has
been done to increase the efficiency of resource provisioning for massively multi-player online games (MMOG) [57].
The researchers develop greedy heuristics to allocate the
minimum number of computing nodes required to meet the
MMOG service needs. Researchers also study the popularity
of games on the cloud gaming service OnLive and propose
methods to improve performance of these systems based
on game popularity [25]. Later, a resource allocation strategy [51] based on the expected ending time of each play
session is proposed. The strategy can reduce the cost of
operation to cloud gaming providers by reducing the number
of purchased nodes required to meet their clients needs. They
note that classical placement algorithms such as First Fit and
Best Fit, are not effective for cloud gaming. After extensive experiments, the authors show an algorithm leveraging
on neural-network-based predictions, which could improve
VM deployment, and potentially decreases operating costs.
VOLUME 4, 2016

Although many cloud computing workloads do not require
a dedicated GPU, cloud gaming servers require access to
a rendering device to provide 3D graphics. As such VM
and workload placements have been researched to ensure
cloud gaming servers have access to adequate GPU resources.
Kim et al. [45] propose a novel architecture to support
multiple-view cloud gaming servers, which share a single
GPU. This architecture provides multi-focal points inside a
shared cloud game, allowing multiple gamers to potentially
share a game world, which is rendered on a single GPU.
Zhao et al. [104] perform an analysis of the performance of
combined CPU/GPU servers for game cloud deployments.
They try offloading different aspects of game processing to
these cloud servers, while maintaining some local processing
at the client side. They conclude that keeping some processing at the client side may lead to an increase in QoS of cloud
gaming platforms.
Pioneering research has also been done on GPU sharing
and resource isolation for cloud gaming servers [70], [103].
These works show that with proper scheduling and allocation of resources we can maximize GPUs utilization, while
maintaining high performance for the gamers sharing a single
GPU. Shea and Liu [80] show that direct GPU assignment to
a virtualized gaming instance can lead to frame rate degradation of over 50% in some gaming applications. They find that
the GPU device pass-through severely diminishes the data
transfer rate between the main memory and the GPU. Their
follow-up work using more advanced platforms [78] reveals
that although the memory transfer degradation still exists,
it no longer affects the frame rate of current generation games.
Hong et al. [34] perform a parallel work, where they discover
that the frame rate issue presents in virtualized clouds may be
mitigated by using mediated pass-through, instead of direct
assignment.
In addition, work has been done to augment existing clouds
and games to improve cloud gaming efficiency. It has been
shown that using game engine information can greatly reduce
the resources needed to calculate the motion estimation (ME)
needed for conventional compression algorithms such as
H.264/AVC [76]. Research into these technique shows that
we can accelerate the motion estimation phase by over 14%
if we use in-game information for encoding. Others have proposed using reusable modules for cloud gaming servers [30].
They refer to these reusable modules as substrates and test
the latency between the different components. All these data
compression studies affect resource allocation; we provide a
comprehensive survey on data compression for cloud gaming
in Section IV-B.1.
2) DISTRIBUTED ARCHITECTURES

Due to the vast geographic distribution of the cloud gaming
clients the design of distributed architectures is of critical
importance to the deployment of cloud gaming systems. The
design of these systems must be carefully optimized to ensure
that a cloud gaming system can sufficiently cover its target audience. Further, to maintain the extremely low delay
7613

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

tolerance required for high QoE even the placement of different server components must be optimized for the lowest possible latency. These innovative distributed architectures have
been investigated in the literature, and we detail them below.
Sselbeck et al. [90] discover that running a cloud gaming
based massively multi-player online game (MMOG) may
suffer from increased latency. These issues are aggravated
in a cloud gaming context because MMOG are already
extremely latency sensitive applications. The increased
latency introduced by a cloud gaming may vastly decrease
the playability of these games. To deal with this increased
latency, they propose a P2P based solution. Similarly,
Prabu and Purushotham [69] propose a P2P system based on
Windows Azure to support online games.
Research has also been done on issues created by the
geographical distance between the end user of cloud gaming
and a cloud gaming data center. Choy et al. [13] show that
the current geographical deployments of public data centers leave a large fraction of the USA with an unacceptable
RTT for low latency applications such as cloud gaming.
To help mitigate this issue, they propose deploying edge
servers near some users for cloud gaming; a follow up work
further explores this architecture and shows that hybrid edgecloud architectures could indeed expand the reach of cloud
gaming data centers [14]. Similarly, Siekkinen et al. [83]
propose a distributed cloud gaming architecture with servers
deployed near local gamers when necessary. The researchers
prototype the system and show that if being deployed widely
enough, for example at the ISP level, cloud gaming could
reach an even larger audience. Tian et al. [92] perform an
extensive investigation into issues of deploying cloud gaming
architecture with distributed data centers. They focus on a
scenario where adaptive streaming technology is available to
the cloud provider. The authors give an optimization algorithm, which can improve gamer QoE as well as reducing
operating costs of the cloud gaming provider. The algorithm
is evaluated using trace driven simulations, and the results
show a potential cost savings of 25% to the cloud gaming
provider.
B. COMMUNICATIONS

Due to the distributed nature of cloud gaming services, the
efficiency and robustness of the communication channels
between cloud gaming servers and clients are crucial and have
been studied. These studies can be classified into two groups:
(i) the data compression algorithms to reduce the network
traffic amount and (ii) the transmission adaptation algorithms
to cope with network dynamics. We survey the work in these
two groups in the following.
1) DATA COMPRESSION

After game scenes are computed on cloud servers, they
have to be captured in proper representations and compressed before being streamed over networks. This can
be done in one of the three data compression schemes:
(i) video compression, which encodes 2D rendered videos and
potentially auxiliary videos (such as depth videos) for client
7614

side post-rendering operations, (ii) graphics compression,
which encodes 3D structures and 2D textures, and (iii) hybrid
compression, which combines both video and graphics compression. Upon cloud gaming servers produce compressed
data streams, the servers send the streams to client computers
over communication channels. We survey each of the three
schemes below.
Video compression is the most widely-used data
compression schemes for cloud gaming probably because
2D video codecs are quite mature. These proposals strive
to improve the coding efficiency in cloud gaming, and
can be further classified into groups depending on whether
in-game graphics contexts, such as camera locations and orientations, are leveraged for higher coding efficiency. We first
survey the proposals that do not leverage graphics contexts.
Cai et al. [6] propose to cooperatively encode cloud gaming
videos of different gamers in the same game session, in
order to leverage inter-gamer redundancy. This is based on
an observation that game scenes of close-by gamers have
non-trivial overlapping areas, and thus adding inter-gamer
predictive video frames may improve the coding efficiency.
The high-level idea is similar to multiview video codecs, such
as H.264/MVC, and the video packets shared by multiple
gamers are exchanged over an auxiliary short-range ad-hoc
network in a P2P fashion. Cai et al. [5] improve upon the
earlier work [6] by addressing three more research problems:
(i) uncertainty due to mobility, (ii) diversity of network
conditions, and (iii) model of QoE. These problems are solved
by a suite of optimization algorithms proposed in their work.
Sun and Wu [88] solve the video rate control problem in cloud
gaming in two steps. First, they adopt the concept of RoI,
and define heterogeneous importance weights for different
regions of game scenes. Next, they propose a macroblocklevel rate control scheme to optimize the RoI-weighted video
quality. Cheung et al. [12] propose to concatenate the graphic
renderer with a customized video coder on servers in cellular
networks and multicast the coded video stream to a gamer
and multiple observers. Their key innovation is to leverage
the depth information used in 3D rendering process to locate
the RoI and then allocate more bits to that region. The
resulting video coder is customized for cloud gaming, yet produces standard compliant video streams for mobile devices.
Liu et al. [53] also leverage rendering information to improve
video encoding in cloud gaming for better perceived video
quality and shorter encoding time. In particular, they first
analyze the rendering information to identify RoI and allocate more bits on more important regions, which leads to
better perceived video quality. In addition, they use this
information to accelerate the encoding process, especially
the time used in motion estimation and macroblock mode
selection. Experiments reveal that their proposed video coder
saves 42% of encoding time and achieves perceived video
quality similar to the unmodified video coder. Similarly,
Semsarzadeh et al. [76] study the feasibility of using
rendering information to accelerate the computationallyintensive motion estimation and demonstrate that it is
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

possible to save 14.32% of the motion estimation time and
8.86% of the total encoding time. The same authors [77]
then concertize and enhance their proposed method, in which
they present the general method, well-designed programming
interface, and detailed motion estimation optimization. Both
subjective and objective tests show that their method suffers from very little quality drop compared to the unmodified video coder. It is reported that they achieve 24% and
39% speedups on the whole encoding process and motion
estimation, respectively.
Next, we survey the proposals that utilize graphics
contexts [82], [101]. Shi et al. [82] propose a video compression scheme for cloud gaming, which consists of two
unique techniques: (i) 3D warping-assisted coding and
(ii) dynamic auxiliary frames. 3D warping is a light-weight
2D post-rendering process, which takes one or multiple
reference view (with image and depth videos) to generate
a virtual view at a different camera location/orientation.
Using 3D warping allows video coders to skip some video
frames, which are then wrapped at client computers. Dynamic
auxiliary frames refer to those video frames rendered with
intelligently-chosen camera location/orientations that are not
part of the game plays. They show that the auxiliary frames
help to improve 3D warping performance. Xu et al. [101] also
propose two techniques to improve the coding efficiency in
cloud gaming. First, the camera rotation is rectified to produce video frames that are more motion estimation friendly.
On client computers, the rectified videos are compensated
with some camera parameters using a light-weight 2D process. Second, a new interpolation algorithm is designed to
preserve sharp edges, which are common in-game scenes.
Last, we notice that the video compression schemes are
mostly orthogonal to the underneath video coding standards,
and can be readily integrated with the recent (or future) video
codecs for further performance improvement.
Graphics compression is proposed for better scalability,
because 3D rendering is done at individual client computers.
Compressing graphics data, however, is quite challenging
and may consume excessive network bandwidth [52], [58].
Lin et al. [52] design a cloud gaming platform based on
graphics compression. Their platform has three graphics
compression tools: (i) intra-frame compression, (ii) interframe compression, and (iii) caching. These tools are applied
to graphics commands, 3D structures, and 2D textures.
Meilnder et al. [58] also develop a similar platform for mobile
devices, where the graphics are sent from cloud servers to
proxy clients, which then render game scenes for mobile
devices. They also propose three graphics compression tools:
(i) caching, (ii) lossy compression, and (iii) multi-layer compression. Generally speaking, tuning cloud gaming platforms
based on graphics compression for heterogeneous client
computers is non-trivial, because mobile (or even some
stationary) computers may not have enough computational
power to locally render game scenes.
Hybrid compression [15], [16] attempts to fully utilize
the available computational power on client computers
VOLUME 4, 2016

to maximize the coding efficiency. For example,
Chuah and Cheung [15] propose to apply graphics compression on simplified 3D structures and 2D textures, and send
them to client computers. The simplified scenes are then
rendered on client computers, which is called the base layer.
Both the full-quality video and the base-layer video are rendered on cloud servers, and the residue video is compressed
using video compression and sent to client computers. This
is called the enhancement layer. Since the base layer is compressed as graphics and the enhancement layer is compressed
as videos, the proposed approach is a hybrid scheme. Based
on the layered coding proposal, Chuah et al. [16] further
propose a complexity-scalable base-layer rendering pipeline
suitable for heterogeneous mobile receivers. In particular,
they employ scalable Blinn-Phong lighting for rendering
the base-layer, which achieves maximum bandwidth saving
under the computing constraints of mobile receivers. Their
experiments demonstrate that their hybrid compression solution, customized for cloud gaming, outperforms single-layer
general-purpose video codecs.
2) ADAPTIVE TRANSMISSION

Even though data compression techniques have been applied
to reduce the network transmission rate, the fluctuating network provisioning still results in unstable service quality to
the gamers in cloud gaming system. These unpredictable
factors include bandwidth, round-trip time, jitter, and etc.
Under this circumstance, adaptive transmission is introduced
to further optimize gamers’ QoE. The foundation of these
studies is based on a common sense: gamers would prefer to
scarify video quality to gain smoother playing experience in
insufficient network QoS supplement.
Jarvinen et al. [43] explore the approach to adapt the
gaming video transmission to available bandwidth. This is
accomplished by integrating a video adaptation module into
the system, which estimates the network status from network monitor in real-time and dynamically manipulates the
encoding parameters, such as frame rate and quantization, to
produce specific adaptive bit rate video stream. The authors
utilize RTT jitter value to detect the network congestion,
in order to decide if the bit rate adaptation should be triggered.
To evaluate this proposal, a following work [47] conducts
experiments on a normal television with an IPTV set-topbox. The authors simulate the network scenarios in homes
and hotels to verify that the proposed adaptation performed
notably better.
Adaptive transmission has also been studied in mobile scenarios. Wang and Dey [95] first decompose the cloud gaming
system’s response time into sub-components: server delay,
network uplink/downlink delay, and client delay. Among
the optimization techniques applied, rate-selection algorithm
provides a dynamic solution that determine the time and the
way to switch the bit rate according to the network delay.
As a further step, Wang and Dey [96] study the potential
of rendering adaptation. They identify the rendering parameters that affect a particular game, including realistic effect
7615

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

(e.g., colour depth, multi-sample, texture-filter, and lighting mode), texture detail, view distance and enabling grass.
Afterwards, they analyze these parameters’ characteristics
of communications and computation costs and propose their
rendering adaptation scheme, which is consisted of optimal
adaptive rendering settings and level-selection algorithm.
With the experiments conducted on commercial wireless
networks, the authors demonstrate that acceptable mobile
gaming user experience can be ensured by their rendering
adaption technique. Thus, they claim that their proposal is
able to facilitate cloud gaming over mobile networks.
Other aspects of transmission adaptation have also been
investigated in the literature. He et al. [31] consider the adaptive transmission from the perspective of multi-player. The
authors calculate the packet urgency based on buffer status
estimation and propose a scheduling algorithm. In addition,
they also suggest an adaptive video segment request scheme,
which estimates media access control (MAC) queue as an
additional information to determine the request time interval
for each gamer, on the purpose of improving the playback
experience. Bujari et al. [2] provides a VoAP algorithm to
address the flow coexistence issue in wireless cloud gaming service delivery. This research problem is introduced by
the concurrent transmissions of TCP-based and UDP-based
streams in home scenario, where the downlink requirement of
gaming video exacerbate the operation of above mentioned
transport protocols. The authors’ solution is to dynamically
modify the advertised window, in such way the system
can limit the growth of the TCP flow’s sending rate.
Wu et al. [99] present a novel transmission scheduling framework dubbed AdaPtive HFR vIdeo Streaming (APHIS) to
address the issue in the cloud gaming video delivery through
wireless networks. The authors first propose an online video
frame selection algorithm to minimize the total distortion
based on network status, input video data, and delay constraint. Afterwards, they introduce an unequal forward error
correction (FEC) coding scheme to provide differentiated
protection for Intra (I) and Predicted (P) frames with lowlatency cost. The proposed APHIS framework is able to
appropriately filter video frames and adjust data protection
levels to optimize the quality of HFR video streaming.
Hemmati et al. [32] propose an object selection algorithm to
provide an adaptive scene rendering solution. The basic idea
is to exclude less important objects from the final output, thus
to reduce less processing time for the server to render and
encode the frames. In such a way, the cloud gaming system is
able to achieve a lower bit rate to stream the resulting video.
The proposed algorithm evaluates the importance of objects
from the game scene based on the analysis of gamers’ activities and do the selection work. Experiments demonstrate that
this approach reduces streaming bit rate by up to 8.8%.
V. COMMERCIAL CLOUD GAMING SERVICES

In addition to the technical problems discussed in prior
sections, commercialization and business models of cloud
gaming services are critical to their success. We survey the
7616

commercialization efforts starting from a short history on
cloud gaming services. G-cluster [26] starts building cloud
gaming services since early 2000’s. In particular, G-cluster
publicly demonstrated live game streaming1 over WiFi to a
PDA in 2001, and a commercial game-on-demand service
in 2004. G-cluster’s service is tightly coupled with several
third-party companies, including game developers, network
operators, and game portals. This can be partially attributed
to the less mature Internet connectivity and data centers,
which force G-cluster to rely on network QoS supports from
network operators. Ojala and Tyrvainen [66] presents the
evolution of G-cluster’s business model, and observe that the
number of G-cluster’s third-party companies is reduced over
years. The number of households having access to G-cluster’s
IPTV-based cloud gaming service increased from 15,000 to
3,000,000 between 2005 and 2010.
In late 2000’s, emerging cloud computing companies start
offering Over-The-Top (OTT) cloud gaming services, represented by OnLive [67], Gaikai [27], and GameNow [28].
OTT refers to delivering multimedia content over the Internet above arbitrary network operators to end users, which
trades QoS supports for ubiquitous access to cloud games.
OnLive [67] was made public in 2009, and was a well-known
cloud gaming service, probably because of its investors
including Warner Bros, AT&T, Ubisoft, and Atrari. OnLive
provided subscription based service, and hosted its servers
in several States within the US, to control the latency due
to geographical distances. OnLive ran into financial difficulty in 2012, and ceased operations in 2015 after selling
their patents to Sony [87]. Gaikai [27] offered cloud gaming
service using a different business model. Gaikai adopt cloud
gaming to allow gamers to try new games without purchasing
and installing software on their own machines. At the end
of each gameplay, gamers are given options to buy the game
if they like it. That is, Gaikai is more like an advertisement
service for game developers to boost their sales. Gaikai was
acquired by Sony [86] in 2012, which leads to a new cloud
gaming service from Sony, called PS Now [68] launched
in 2014. PS Now allows gamers to play PlayStation games
as cloud games, and adopts two charging models: per-game
and monthly subscription.
The aforementioned cloud gaming services can be classified in groups from two aspects. We discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of different groups in the following. First,
cloud gaming services are either: (i) integrated with underlaying networks or (ii) provided as OTT services. Tighter integration provides better QoS guarantees which potentially lead
to better user experience, while OTT reduces the expenses on
cloud gaming services at a possible risk of unstable and worse
user experience. Second, cloud gaming services adopt one of
the three charging models: (i) subscription, (ii) per-game, and
(iii) free to gamers. More specifically, cloud gaming users
pay for services in the first two charging models, while thirdparty companies, which can be game developers or network
1 At that time, the term cloud was not yet popular.
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

operators, pay for services in the third charging model. In the
future, there may be innovative ways to offer cloud gaming
services to general publics in a commercially-viable manner.

hence, we believe that we are on the edge of a new era of
a whole new cloud gaming ecosystem, which will eventually
leads to the next generation cloud gaming services.

VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

REFERENCES

In this article, we grouped the existing cloud gaming
research into four classifications: (i) overview, (ii) platform,
(iii) optimization, and (iv) commercialization. In Section II
(overview), we included papers that introducing general and
specialized (such as mobile) cloud gaming. In Section III
(platform), we presented the basic cloud gaming platforms
that support quantitative performance measurements. More
specifically, we considered: (i) QoS evaluations, such as
energy consumption and network metrics, and (ii) QoE evaluations, such as gamer experience. In Section IV (optimization), we presented the two major optimization directions:
(i) cloud server infrastructure, such as resource allocation
and distributed architecture, and (ii) communications, such
as data compression and adaptive transmission. In Section V
(commercialization), we gave a brief history of cloud gaming
services, followed by the design decisions made by representative commercial cloud gaming services.
Cloud gaming is not a panacea and incurs non-trivial costs
to service providers. Minimizing the cost on cloud and networking resources while achieving high gamer experience
requires careful optimization like the approaches explored
in this survey. Without these optimizations, service provider
cannot consolidate enough cloud gaming users to each physical machine. This in turn leads to much lower profits, and
may drive the service provider out of business. Some early
industrial pioneers such as OnLive [67] have unfortunately
exited the market. More recent cloud gaming services such
as PS Now [68] and GameNow [28] are better optimized
and will be more competitive in the current gaming industry.
As commercial cloud gaming services become financially
sustainable, the new cloud gaming ecosystem will continue
to expand, leading to more investments and technologies to
improve these services. Much of the innovation needed to
push cloud gaming to the next level may reside in creating
new programing paradigms to support the unique needs of
these complex systems. Most current cloud gaming platforms
work as a ‘‘black box’’ simply wrapping a traditionally programed game in a support system to enable cloud gaming.
Although, the original black box model of cloud gaming has
led to many practical real world implementations a more
integrated approach may be necessary. It is likely that using
in-game contexts or whole new programing paradigms may
solve some of cloud gaming shortcomings [7]. Future cloud
gaming aware programing paradigms will help facilitate both
better user experience and resource utilization. This will
allow more innovative, yet demanding ideas to be implemented, which in turn results in critical momentum towards
building the next generation cloud gaming services.
In summary, the advances of technologies turn playable
cloud gaming services into reality; more optimization techniques gradually make cloud gaming services profitable;
VOLUME 4, 2016

[1] (Mar. 2013). asm.js. [Online]. Available: http://asmjs.org/
[2] A. Bujari, M. Massaro, and C. Palazzi, ‘‘Vegas over access point: Making
room for thin client game systems in a wireless home,’’ IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2002–2012, Dec. 2015.
[3] W. Cai, H. Chan, X. Wang, and V. Leung, ‘‘Cognitive resource optimization for the decomposed cloud gaming platform,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2038–2051, Dec. 2015.
[4] W. Cai, M. Chen, and V. C. M. Leung, ‘‘Toward gaming as a service,’’
IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 12–18, May/Jun. 2014.
[5] W. Cai, Z. Hong, X. Wang, H. Chan, and V. Leung, ‘‘Quality-ofexperience optimization for a cloud gaming system with ad hoc cloudlet
assistance,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 2092–2104, Dec. 2015.
[6] W. Cai, V. Leung, and L. Hu, ‘‘A cloudlet-assisted multiplayer cloud gaming system,’’ Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 144–152, Nov. 2013.
[7] W. Cai et al., ‘‘The future of cloud gaming,’’ Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 4,
pp. 687–691, Apr. 2016.
[8] Y.-C. Chang, P.-H. Tseng, K.-T. Chen, and C.-L. Lei, ‘‘Understanding the
performance of thin-client gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Tech.
Committee Commun. Quality Rel. (CQR), Naples, FL, USA, May 2011,
pp. 1–6.
[9] K.-T. Chen, Y.-C. Chang, H.-J. Hsu, D.-Y. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, and
C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘On the quality of service of cloud gaming systems,’’ IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 480–495, Feb. 2014.
[10] K. Chen, Y. Chang, P. Tseng, C. Huang, and C. Lei, ‘‘Measuring the latency of cloud gaming systems,’’ in Proc. ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia (MM), Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Nov. 2011, pp. 1269–1272.
[11] K.-T. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, and C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘Cloud gaming onward:
Research opportunities and outlook,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Multimedia
Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–4.
[12] G. Cheung, T. Sakamoto, and W. Tan, ‘‘Graphics-to-video encoding for
3G mobile game viewer multicast using depth values,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Singapore, Oct. 2004, pp. 2805–2808.
[13] S. Choy, B. Wong, G. Simon, and C. Rosenberg, ‘‘The brewing
storm in cloud gaming: A measurement study on cloud to end-user
latency,’’ in Proc. 11th IEEE Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support
Games (NetGames), Venice, Italy, Nov. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[14] S. Choy, B. Wong, G. Simon, and C. Rosenberg, ‘‘A hybrid edge-cloud
architecture for reducing on-demand gaming latency,’’ Multimedia Syst.,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 503–519, Oct. 2014.
[15] S.-P. Chuah and N.-M. Cheung, ‘‘Layered coding for mobile cloud
gaming,’’ in Proc. Int. Workshop Massively Multiuser Virtual
Environ. (MMVE), Singapore, Mar. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[16] S.-P. Chuah, N.-M. Cheung, and C. Yuen, ‘‘Layered coding for mobile
cloud gaming using scalable Blinn–Phong lighting,’’ IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 3112–3125, Jul. 2016.
[17] S.-P. Chuah, C. Yuen, and N.-M. Cheung, ‘‘Cloud gaming: A green
solution to massive multiplayer online games,’’ IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 78–87, Aug. 2014.
[18] M. Claypool, ‘‘Motion and scene complexity for streaming video games,’’
in Proc. Int. Conf. Found. Digit. Games (FDG), Orlando, FL, USA,
Apr. 2009, pp. 34–41.
[19] M. Claypool and K. Claypool, ‘‘Latency and player actions in online
games,’’ Commun. ACM, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 40–45, Nov. 2006.
[20] M. Claypool and D. Finkel, ‘‘The effects of latency on player performance
in cloud-based games,’’ in Proc. 13th Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support
Games (NetGames), Nagoya, Japan, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[21] M. Claypool, D. Finkel, A. Grant, and M. Solano, ‘‘Thin to win?
Network performance analysis of the OnLive thin client game system,’’ in Proc. 11th IEEE Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support
Games (NetGames), Venice, Italy, Nov. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[22] E. Depasquale et al., ‘‘An analytical method of assessment of RemoteFX
as a cloud gaming platform,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Medit. Electrotech.
Conf. (MELECON), Beirut, Lebanon, Apr. 2014, pp. 127–133.
[23] S. Dey, ‘‘Cloud mobile media: Opportunities, challenges, and directions,’’
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA,
Feb. 2012, pp. 929–933.
7617

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

[24] (Aug. 2013). Emscripten. [Online]. Available: http://emscripten.org
[25] D. Finkel, M. Claypool, S. Jaffe, T. Nguyen, and B. Stephen, ‘‘Assignment of games to servers in the OnLive cloud game system,’’ in Proc.
Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Nagoya, Japan,
Dec. 2014, Art. no. 4.
[26] (Jan. 2015). G-Cluster. [Online]. Available: http://www.gcluster.com/eng
[27] (Jan. 2015). GaiKai. [Online]. Available: http://www.gaikai.com/
[28] (Jan. 2015). GameNow. [Online]. Available: http://www.ugamenow.com
[29] R. Hans, U. Lampe, D. Burgstahler, M. Hellwig, and R. Steinmetz,
‘‘Where did my battery go? Quantifying the energy consumption of cloud
gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Services (MS), Anchorage, AK,
USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 63–67.
[30] M. Hassam, N. Kara, F. Belqasmi, and R. Glitho, ‘‘Virtualized infrastructure for video game applications in cloud environments,’’ in Proc.
ACM Symp. Mobility Manage. Wireless Access (MobiWac), Montreal,
QC, Canada, Sep. 2014, pp. 109–114.
[31] L. He, G. Liu, and C. Yuchen, ‘‘Buffer status and content aware scheduling scheme for cloud gaming based on video streaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Multimedia Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[32] M. Hemmati, A. Javadtalab, A. Shirehjini, S. Shirmohammadi, and
T. Arici, ‘‘Game as video: Bit rate reduction through adaptive object
encoding,’’ in Proc. ACM Workshop Netw. Oper. Syst. Support Digit.
Audio Video (NOSSDAV), Oslo, Norway, Feb. 2013, pp. 7–12.
[33] H.-J. Hong, D.-Y. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, K.-T. Chen, and C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘QoEaware virtual machine placement for cloud games,’’ in Proc. Annu.
Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Denver, CO, USA,
Dec. 2013, pp. 1–2.
[34] H.-J. Hong, D.-Y. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, K.-T. Chen, and C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘Placing virtual machines to optimize cloud gaming experience,’’ IEEE Trans.
Cloud Comput., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 42–53, Jan. 2015.
[35] H.-J. Hong, C.-F. Hsu, T.-H. Tsai, C.-Y. Huang, K.-T. Chen, and
C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘Enabling adaptive cloud gaming in an open-source cloud
gaming platform,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25,
no. 12, pp. 2078–2091, Dec. 2015.
[36] H.-J. Hong, T.-Y. Fan-Chiang, C.-R. Lee, K.-T. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, and
C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘GPU consolidation for cloud games: Are we there yet?’’ in
Proc. 13th Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games, Nagoya, Japan,
Dec. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[37] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, B. Song, M. Hassan, A. Alelaiwi, and
A. Alamri, ‘‘Audio–visual emotion-aware cloud gaming framework,’’
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2105–2118,
Dec. 2015.
[38] C.-Y. Huang, K.-T. Chen, D.-Y. Chen, H.-J. Hsu, and C.-H. Hsu, ‘‘GamingAnywhere: The first open source cloud gaming system,’’ ACM Trans.
Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 10, no. 1s, pp. 10:1–10:25,
Jan. 2014.
[39] C.-Y. Huang, P.-H. Chen, Y.-L. Huang, K.-T. Chen, and C.-H. Hsu,
‘‘Measuring the client performance and energy consumption in mobile
cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. 13th Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support
Games (NetGames), Nagoya, Japan, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–3.
[40] C.-Y. Huang, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-C. Chang, and K.-T. Chen, ‘‘GamingAnywhere: An open cloud gaming system,’’ in Proc. ACM Multimedia Syst.
Conf. (MMSys), Oslo, Norway, Feb. 2013, pp. 36–47.
[41] C.-Y. Huang, C.-H. Hsu, D.-Y. Chen, and K.-T. Chen, ‘‘Quantifying user
satisfaction in mobile cloud games,’’ in Proc. Workshop Mobile Video
Del. (MoVid), Singapore, Mar. 2013, pp. 4:1–4:6.
[42] M. Jarschel, D. Schlosser, S. Scheuring, and T. Hoßfeld, ‘‘Gaming in the
clouds: QoE and the users’ perspective,’’ Math. Comput. Model., vol. 57,
nos. 11–12, pp. 2883–2894, Jun. 2013.
[43] S. Jarvinen, J. P. Laulajainen, T. Sutinen, and S. Sallinen, ‘‘QoS-aware
real-time video encoding: How to improve the user experience of a
gaming-on-demand service,’’ in Proc. IEEE Consum. Commun. Netw.
Conf. (CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Jan. 2006, pp. 994–997.
[44] K. I. Kim, S. Y. Bae, D. C. Lee, C. S. Cho, H. J. Lee, and K. C. Lee,
‘‘Cloud-based gaming service platform supporting multiple devices,’’
ETRI J., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 960–968, Dec. 2013.
[45] S. S. Kim, K. I. Kim, and J. Won, ‘‘Multi-view rendering approach
for cloud-based gaming services,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Future
Internet (AFIN), French Riviera, France, Aug. 2011, pp. 102–107.
[46] U. Lampe, Q. Wu, S. Dargutev, R. Hans, A. Miede, and R. Steinmetz,
‘‘Assessing latency in cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput.
Services Sci. (CLOSER), Barcelona, Spain, Sep. 2014, pp. 52–68.
7618

[47] J. Laulajainen, T. Sutinen, and S. Járvinen, ‘‘Experiments with QoSaware gaming-on-demand service,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw.
Appl. (AINA), Vienna, Austria, Apr. 2006, pp. 805–810.
[48] K. Lee et al., ‘‘Outatime: Using speculation to enable low-latency continuous interaction for cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
Syst., Appl., Services (MobiSys), Florence, Italy, May 2015, pp. 151–165.
[49] K. Lee, D. Chu, E. Cuervo, A. Wolman, and J. Flinn, ‘‘Demo: DeLorean:
Using speculation to enable low-latency continuous interaction for
mobile cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Syst., Appl.,
Services (MobiSys), Florence, Italy, May 2015, p. 347.
[50] Y.-T. Lee, K.-T. Chen, H.-I. Su, and C.-L. Lei, ‘‘Are all games equally
cloud-gaming-friendly? An electromyographic approach,’’ in Proc. 11th
Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Venice, Italy,
Nov. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[51] Y. Li, X. Tang, and W. Cai, ‘‘Play request dispatching for efficient
virtual machine usage in cloud gaming,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2052–2063, Dec. 2015.
[52] L. Lin et al., ‘‘LiveRender: A cloud gaming system based on compressed
graphics streaming,’’ in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia (MM), Orlando,
FL, USA, Nov. 2014, pp. 347–356.
[53] Y. Liu, S. Dey, and Y. Lu, ‘‘Enhancing video encoding for cloud gaming
using rendering information,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1960–1974, Dec. 2015.
[54] Y. Liu, S. Wang, and S. Dey, ‘‘Modeling, characterizing, and enhancing
user experience in cloud mobile rendering,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.,
Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA, Jan. 2012, pp. 739–745.
[55] M. Manzano, J. A. Hernandez, M. Uruena, and E. Calle, ‘‘An empirical
study of cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. 11th IEEE Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst.
Support Games (NetGames), Venice, Italy, Nov. 2012, pp. 1–2.
[56] M. Manzano, M. Urueña, M. Sužnjević, E. Calle, J. Hernández, and
M. Matijasevic, ‘‘Dissecting the protocol and network traffic of the
OnLive cloud gaming platform,’’ Multimedia Syst., vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 451–470, Mar. 2014.
[57] M. Marzolla, S. Ferretti, and G. D’Angelo, ‘‘Dynamic resource provisioning for cloud-based gaming infrastructures,’’ ACM Comput. Entertainment, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 4:1–4:20, Dec. 2012.
[58] D. Meilander, F. Glinka, S. Gorlatch, L. Lin, W. Zhang, and X. Liao,
‘‘Bringing mobile online games to clouds,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops (INFOCOMW), Toronto, ON, Canada, Apr. 2014,
pp. 340–345.
[59] D. Mishra, M. El Zarki, A. Erbad, C.-H. Hsu, and N. Venkatasubramanian, ‘‘Clouds+Games: A multifaceted approach,’’ IEEE Internet
Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 20–27, May 2014.
[60] S. Möller, D. Pommer, J. Beyer, and J. Rake-revelant, ‘‘Factors influencing gaming QoE: Lessons learned from the evaluation of cloud gaming
services,’’ in Proc. Int. Workshop Perceptual Quality Syst. (PQS), Vienna,
Austria, Sep. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[61] C. Moreno, N. Tizon, and M. Preda, ‘‘Mobile cloud convergence in
GaaS: A business model proposition,’’ in Proc. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst.
Sci. (HICSS), Maui, HI, USA, Jan. 2012, pp. 1344–1352.
[62] (Mar. 2010). Welcome to Native Client. [Online]. Available:
https://developer.chrome.com/native-client
[63] (Mar. 2010). Google’s Native Client Goes ARM and Beyond. [Online].
Available: http://www.h-online.com/open/news/item/Google-s-NativeClient-goes-ARM-and-beyond-957478.html
[64] X. Nan et al., ‘‘A novel cloud gaming framework using joint video and
graphics streaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME),
Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[65] (May 2016). NVidia Grid. [Online]. Available: http://www.nvidia.com/
object/cloud-gaming.html
[66] A. Ojala and P. Tyrvainen, ‘‘Developing cloud business models: A case
study on cloud gaming,’’ IEEE Softw., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 42–47, Jul. 2011.
[67] (Jan. 2015). OnLive. [Online]. Available: http://www.onlive.com/
[68] (Jan. 2015). PlayStation Now. [Online]. Available: http://
www.playstation.com/en-us/explore/playstationnow/
[69] S. Prabu and S. Purushotham, ‘‘Cloud gaming with P2P network
using XAML and Windows Azure,’’ in Proc. Conf. Recent Trends
Comput., Commun. Inf. Technol. (ObCom), Vellore, India, Dec. 2011,
pp. 165–172.
[70] Z. Qi, J. Yao, C. Zhang, M. Yu, Z. Yang, and H. Guan, ‘‘VGRIS:
Virtualized GPU resource isolation and scheduling in cloud gaming,’’ ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 203–214,
Jul. 2014.
VOLUME 4, 2016

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

[71] P. Quax, A. Beznosyk, W. Vanmontfort, R. Marx, and W. Lamotte,
‘‘An evaluation of the impact of game genre on user experience in cloud
gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Games Innov. Conf. (IGIC), Vancouver, BC,
Canada, Sep. 2013, pp. 216–221.
[72] K. Raaen, R. Eg, and C. Griwodz, ‘‘Can gamers detect cloud delay?’’ in
Proc. Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Nagoya,
Japan, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–3.
[73] L. Riungu-kalliosaari, J. Kasurinen, and K. Smolander, ‘‘Cloud services
and cloud gaming in game development,’’ in Proc. IADIS Game Entertainment Technol. (GET), Prague, Czech Republic, Jul. 2013, pp. 1–10.
[74] P. E. Ross, ‘‘Cloud computing’s killer app: Gaming,’’ IEEE Spectr.,
vol. 46, no. 3, p. 14, Mar. 2009.
[75] (Nov. 2014). Cloud Gaming to Reach Inflection Point in 2015. [Online].
Available: http://tinyurl.com/p3z9hs2
[76] M. Semsarzadeh, M. Hemmati, A. Javadtalab, A. Yassine, and
S. Shirmohammadi, ‘‘A video encoding speed-up architecture for
cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo Workshops,
Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[77] M. Semsarzadeh, A. Yassine, and S. Shirmohammadi, ‘‘Video encoding
acceleration in cloud gaming,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1975–1987, Dec. 2015.
[78] R. Shea, D. Fu, and J. Liu, ‘‘Cloud gaming: Understanding the support
from advanced virtualization and hardware,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2026–2037, Dec. 2015.
[79] R. Shea, D. Fu, and J. Liu, ‘‘Towards bridging online game playing and
live broadcasting: Design and optimization,’’ in Proc. ACM Workshop
Netw. Oper. Syst. Support Digit. Audio Video (NOSSDAV), Portland, OR,
USA, Mar. 2015, pp. 61–66.
[80] R. Shea and J. Liu, ‘‘On GPU pass-through performance for cloud gaming: Experiments and analysis,’’ in Proc. Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst.
Support for Games (NetGames’13), p. 6:1–6:6, Denver, CO, Dec. 2013.
[81] R. Shea, J. Liu, E. C.-H. Ngai, and Y. Cui, ‘‘Cloud gaming: Architecture
and performance,’’ IEEE Netw., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 16–21, Jul./Aug. 2013.
[82] S. Shi, C.-H. Hsu, K. Nahrstedt, and R. Campbell, ‘‘Using graphics
rendering contexts to enhance the real-time video coding for mobile cloud
gaming,’’ in Proc. ACM Multimedia (MM), Nov. 2011, pp. 103–112.
[83] T. Kämäräinen, M. Siekkinen, Y. Xiao, and A. Ylä-Jääski, ‘‘Towards
pervasive and mobile gaming with distributed cloud infrastructure,’’ in
Proc. Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Nagoya,
Japan, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[84] I. Slivar, M. Suznjevic, L. Skorin-Kapov, and M. Matijasevic, ‘‘Empirical
QoE study of in-home streaming of online games,’’ in Proc. Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Nagoya, Japan, Dec. 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[85] O. Soliman, A. Rezgui, H. Soliman, and N. Manea, ‘‘Mobile cloud
gaming: Issues and challenges,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Mobile Web Inf.
Syst. (MobiWIS), Paphos, Cyprus, Aug. 2013, pp. 121–128.
[86] (Jul. 2012). Cloud Gaming Adoption is Accelerating . . . and Fast!
[Online]. Available: http://www.nttcom.tv/2012/07/09/cloud-gamingadoption-is-acceleratingand-fast/
[87] (Apr. 2015). Sony buys OnLive Streaming Game Service, Which Will Shut
Down Later This Month. [Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/6Xe9Dx
[88] K. Sun and D. Wu, ‘‘Video rate control strategies for cloud gaming,’’
J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent., vol. 30, pp. 234–241, Jul. 2015.
[89] M. Suznjevic, J. Beyer, L. Skorin-Kapov, S. Moller, and N. Sorsa,
‘‘Towards understanding the relationship between game type and network
traffic for cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo
Workshops (ICMEW), Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[90] R. Süselbeck, G. Schiele, and C. Becker, ‘‘Peer-to-peer support for lowlatency massively multiplayer online games in the cloud,’’ in Proc. 8th
Annu. Workshop Netw. Syst. Support Games (NetGames), Paris, France,
Nov. 2009, pp. 1–2.
[91] M. R. Hosseinzadeh Taher, H. Ahmadi, and M. R. Hashemi,
‘‘Power-aware analysis of H.264/AVC encoding parameters
for cloud gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo
Workshops (ICMEW), Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[92] H. Tian, D. Wu, J. He, Y. Xu, and M. Chen, ‘‘On achieving cost-effective
adaptive cloud gaming in geo-distributed data centers,’’ IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2064–2077, Dec. 2015.
[93] (Jan. 2015). Ubitus. [Online]. Available: http://www.ubitus.net
[94] S. Wang and S. Dey, ‘‘Modeling and characterizing user experience in
a cloud server based mobile gaming approach,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global
Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Honolulu, HI, USA, Nov. 2009,
pp. 1–7.
VOLUME 4, 2016

[95] S. Wang and S. Dey, ‘‘Addressing response time and video quality in
remote server based Internet mobile gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Wireless
Commun. Netw. Conf., Sydney, NSW, Australia, Apr. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[96] S. Wang and S. Dey, ‘‘Rendering adaptation to address communication
and computation constraints in cloud mobile gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Miami, FL, USA, Dec. 2010,
pp. 1–6.
[97] S. Wang and S. Dey, ‘‘Cloud mobile gaming: Modeling and measuring user experience in mobile wireless networks,’’ ACM Trans. Mobile
Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 10–21, Jan. 2012.
[98] S. Wang, Y. Liu, and S. Dey, ‘‘Wireless network aware cloud scheduler for
scalable cloud mobile gaming,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
Ottawa, ON, Canada, Jun. 2012, pp. 2081–2086.
[99] J. Wu, C. Yuen, N.-M. Cheung, J. Chen, and C. W. Chen, ‘‘Enabling
adaptive high-frame-rate video streaming in mobile cloud gaming applications,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 1988–2001, Dec. 2015.
[100] Z. Wu, ‘‘Gaming in the cloud: One of the future entertainment,’’ in Proc.
Interact. Multimedia Conf., Southampton, U.K., Jan. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[101] L. Xu, X. Guo, Y. Lu, S. Li, O. Au, and L. Fang, ‘‘A low latency cloud
gaming system using edge preserved image homography,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Chengdu, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[102] Z. Xue, D. Wu, J. He, X. Hei, and Y. Liu, ‘‘Playing high-end video games
in the cloud: A measurement study,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2013–2025, Dec. 2015.
[103] C. Zhang, Z. Qi, J. Yao, M. Yu, and H. Guan, ‘‘vGASA: Adaptive scheduling algorithm of virtualized GPU resource in cloud gaming,’’ IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3036–3045, Nov. 2014.
[104] Z. Zhao, K. Hwang, and J. Villeta, ‘‘Game cloud design with
virtualized CPU/GPU servers and initial performance results,’’ in Proc.
Workshop Sci. Cloud Comput. Date (ScienceCloud), Delft,
The Netherlands, Jun. 2012, pp. 23–30.

WEI CAI [S’12–M’16] received the B.Eng. degree
in software engineering from Xiamen University
in 2008, the M.S. degree in electrical engineering
and computer science from Seoul National University in 2011, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and computer engineering from The University of
British Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, BC, Canada,
in 2016. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research
Fellow with the UBC. He has completed visiting
researches with Academia Sinica, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, and National Institute of Informatics, Japan. His
researches focus on gaming as a service, mobile cloud computing, online
gaming, software engineering, and interactive multimedia. He received
awards of the 2015 Chinese Government Award for the Outstanding SelfFinanced Students Abroad, UBC Doctoral Four-Year-Fellowship, Brain
Korea 21 Scholarship, and Excellent Student Scholarship from the Bank
of China. He is also a co-recipient of the best paper awards from the
CloudCom2014, the SmartComp2014, and the CloudComp2013.

RYAN SHEA [S’08–M’16] received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, in 2016.
He is currently a University Research Associate
with the Big Data Systems. His research interests
include computer and network virtualization, performance issues in cloud computing, and energy
and performance issues with the Big Data Systems. He has received the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship in 2013. He was a recipient
of the best student paper award from the IEEE/ACM 21st International
Workshop on Quality of Service for his paper Understanding the Impact
of Denial of Service Attacks on Virtual Machines in 2012. His recent
publications include a point of view article in the Proceedings of the IEEE
entitled The Future of Cloud Gaming.
7619

W. Cai et al.: Survey on Cloud Gaming: Future of Computer Games

CHUN-YING HUANG [S’03–M’08] received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering department from National Taiwan University in 2007.
He leads the Security and Systems Laboratory
with National Chiao Tung University. From 2008
to 2013, he was an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University, where he
was an Associate Professor from 2013 to 2016.
He has been an Associate Professor with the
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, since
2016. His research interests include system security, multimedia networking,
and mobile computing. He is a member of ACM.
KUAN-TA CHEN [S’04–M’06–SM’15] received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science
from National Tsing-Hua University, in 1998 and
2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University
in 2006. He is a Research Fellow with the Institute
of Information Science, and the Research Center for Information Technology Innovation (joint
appointment) of Academia Sinica. His research
interests include quality of experience, multimedia
systems, and social computing. He received the best paper award in the
IWSEC 2008 and the K. T. Li Distinguished Young Scholar Award from
ACM Taipei/Taiwan Chapter in 2009. He also received the Outstanding
Young Electrical Engineer Award from The Chinese Institute of Electrical
Engineering in 2010, the Young Scholar’s Creativity Award from Foundation
for the Advancement of Outstanding Scholarship in 2013, and the IEEE
ComSoc MMTC Best Journal Paper Award in 2014. He was an Associate
Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA from 2011 to 2014 and has
been an Associate Editor of ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing,
Communications, and Applications since 2015. He is a Senior Member
of ACM.
JIANGCHUAN LIU [S’01–M’03–SM’08] received
the B.Eng. (cum laude) degree in computer science
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
in 2003.
He was an Assistant Professor with The Chinese
University of Hong Kong from 2003 to 2004.
He is a University Professor with the School
of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University,
British Columbia, Canada, and an NSERC E.W.R. Steacie Memorial Fellow.
He is an EMC-Endowed Visiting Chair Professor of Tsinghua University,
Beijing, from 2013 to 2016. His research interests include multimedia
systems and networks, cloud computing, social networking, online gaming,
big data computing, wireless sensor networks, and peer-to-peer networks.
Dr. Liu is a co-recipient of the inaugural Test of Time Paper
Award of the IEEE INFOCOM (2015), the ACM SIGMM TOMCCAP
Nicolas D. Georganas best paper award (2013), the ACM Multimedia
best paper award (2012), the IEEE Globecom best paper award (2011),
and the IEEE Communications Society best paper award on Multimedia
Communications (2009). His students received the Best Student Paper Award
of the IEEE/ACM IWQoS in 2008 and 2012. He has served on the editorial
boards of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
MULTIMEDIA, the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS, the IEEE
ACCESS, the IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, Computer Communications,
and Wiley Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing. He is the
Steering Committee Chair of the IEEE/ACM IWQoS (2015–2017) and
TPC Co-Chair of the IEEE IC2E’2017, and the IEEE/ACM IWQoS’2014.
He serves as an Area Chair of the IEEE INFOCOM, ACM Multimedia, and
the IEEE ICME. According to Google Scholar, the citations of his papers are
over 10,000, and as an h-index of 46.

7620

VICTOR C. M. LEUNG [S’75–M’89–SM’97–
F’03] is a Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and holder of the TELUS Mobility
Research Chair with The University of British
Columbia (UBC). His research is in the areas of
wireless networks and mobile systems. He has
co-authored over 900 technical papers in archival
journals and refereed conference proceedings, several of which had received best paper awards.
He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada,
the Canadian Academy of Engineering, and the Engineering Institute
of Canada. He is serving or has served on the editorial boards of the
IEEE ACCESS, the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS –
SERIES ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, the IEEE WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, and several other journals. He has provided
leadership to the technical program committees and organizing committees
of numerous international conferences. He was the recipient of the 1977
APEBC Gold Medal, NSERC Postgraduate Scholarships from 1977 to 1981,
2012 UBC Killam Research Prize, and the IEEE Vancouver Section Centennial Award.

CHENG-HSIN HSU [S’09–M’10–SM’16] received
M.S./B.S. degrees from National Chung-Cheng
University, the M.Eng. degree from the University
of Maryland, and the Ph.D. degree from Simon
Fraser University. He was with the Deutsche
Telekom Laboratory, Motorola Inc., and Lucent
Technologies. He has been an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Science,
National Tsing Hua University, since 2014, where
he was an Assistant Professor from 2011 to 2014.
He visited the University of California at Irvine, Qatar Computing Research
Institute, and University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign, in 2013, 2014, and
2015, respectively. His research interests are in multimedia networking,
mobile computing, and computer networks. He has been served as an
Associate Editor of ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications since 2014, and the IEEE MMTC E-LETTER
from 2012 to 2014. He and his colleagues received the best paper award
from the IEEE RTAS’12, the TAOS best paper award from the IEEE
GLOBECOM’12, best paper award from the IEEE Innovation’08, and the
Best Demo Award from the ACM Multimedia’08.

VOLUME 4, 2016

