See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269200255

LookingGlass
Conference	Paper	·	January	2013
DOI:	10.1145/2492517.2500275

CITATIONS

READS

0

53

4	authors:
Nyunsu	Kim

Sedat	Gokalp

Arizona	State	University

Arizona	State	University

10	PUBLICATIONS			17	CITATIONS			

11	PUBLICATIONS			21	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Hasan	Davulcu

Mark	Woodward

Arizona	State	University

Arizona	State	University

110	PUBLICATIONS			843	CITATIONS			

63	PUBLICATIONS			568	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Nyunsu	Kim	on	15	January	2015.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.	All	in-text	references	underlined	in	blue	are	added	to	the	original	document
and	are	linked	to	publications	on	ResearchGate,	letting	you	access	and	read	them	immediately.

LookingGlass: A Visual Intelligence Platform for
Tracking Online Social Movements
Nyunsu Kim, Sedat Gokalp, Hasan Davulcu, Mark Woodward
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering,
Arizona State University
Tempe, USA
{nkim30, Sedat.Gokalp, hdavulcu, Mark.Woodward}@asu.edu

Abstract— We propose a multi-scale text mining methodology
and develop a visual intelligence platform for tracking the
diffusion of online social movements. The algorithms utilize large
amounts of text collected from a wide variety of organizations’
media outlets to discover their hotly debated topics, and their
discriminative perspectives voiced by opposing camps organized
into multiple scales. We utilize discriminating perspectives to
classify and map individual Tweeter's message content to social
movements based on the perspectives expressed in their weekly
tweets. We developed a visual intelligence platform, named
LookingGlass, to track the geographical footprint, shifting
positions and flows of individuals, topics and perspectives
between groups.
Keywords—Text mining; Multi-scaling; Social movements

I.

INTRODUCTION

We propose a multi-scaling based methodology and a
visual intelligence platform that represents an important step
change in how we might observe and analyze radical social
movements. Rather than placing external forms of analysis that
color and tautological define what is ‘radical’ or not from an
external perspective, we propose a more ontologically oriented
approach. We seek to generate a methodology to allow the
orientations of these movements to define themselves via their
own discourse within their own universe and understanding of
actions, rather than an external and potentially poorly
calibrated analysis of what constitutes radical. Without this
kind of fundamental reorientation to research of religiously or
politically inspired social movements, we get the poor
assumption based analysis that (incorrectly) predicts and
champions ill-defined relationships between certain religious
or political sects and violence, for example. With our
reorientation of approach, we are more fundamentally able to
examine such relationships in a way that should allow analysts
to take other kinds of nuance and understanding into account.
Current technology for monitoring social media tracks
keyword matching documents for names of known groups,
individuals, and places. However, they cannot find the
proverbial “needles in a haystack” corresponding to those
individuals with radical or extremist ideas, connect the dots to
identify their relationships, and their socio-cultural, political,
economic drivers. Raw data in multiple modalities (e.g. tweets,
blogs, and newswires) gushes like an uncapped oil well but

existing technologies fail to provide comprehensive tools for
making-sense of the data and for seeing the bigger picture.
LookingGlass is designed for real-time contextual analysis of
complex socio-political situations that are rife with volatility
and uncertainty. It is able to rapidly recognize radical hot-spots
of networks, narratives and activities, and their socio-cultural
economic, political drivers. Also, it is informed by highly
trained area experts on the ground with social science and
subject matter expertise as well as local cultural knowledge.
II.

PROBLEM DEFINITION

One of the fundamental issues with interpretative and
qualitative data collection and analysis has been the
researchers’ bias while conducting the research. Goertz [1, 2]
makes the crucial point that, in their enthusiasm for reifying
complex sociological or political concepts, theorists and
empiricists often focus too much on what a concept is, rather
than on identifying the concept on a continuum, in order to
assess when a concept is present versus when it is absent. In
the social sciences, scaling is the process of measuring and
ordering actors (subjects) with respect to quantitative attributes
or traits (items). In the context of our project, both social
movements (subjects) and their socio-economic, political, or
religious beliefs, goals and practices (items) are mapped
simultaneously on a set of scales via expert inputs and text
mining algorithms. Recently we developed algorithms [3, 4, 5,
6] that utilize large amounts of multilingual text collected from
a wide variety of organizations’ media outlets (e.g. web sites,
blogs, news, RSS feeds, tweets, leaders’ speeches etc.) to (i)
discover hotly debated topics relevant for a scale, and
discriminative topic-specific perspectives voiced by opposing
camps, (ii) next, we identify a subset of these discriminating
perspectives with a very specific statistical pattern
(probabilistic Guttman pattern [7]) that can be used to classify
and rank any actor’s polarity and neutral-to-extreme position
on a continuous scale at area expert-level accuracy, and finally,
(iii) we utilize spatial-temporal analysis of real-time textual
message feeds, from organizational RSS feeds and individuals’
Tweets to track the geographical footprint, hot spots, shifting
positions and flows of individuals between groups.

III.

MULTI-SCALE MODELING OF SOCIAL MOVEMENTS

Our modeling leverages social theory including
Durkheim’s research on collective representations [8],
Simmel’s work on conflict and social differentiation [9],
Wallace’s writings on revitalization movements [10], and Tilly
and Bayat’s studies on contemporary social movement theory
[11, 12] to understand features shared by violent social and
political movements and by those opposing them. Radicalism
is the ideological conviction that it is acceptable and sometimes
obligatory to use violence to effect profound political, cultural
and religious transformations and to change the existing social
order fundamentally. Radical movements have complex origins
and depend on diverse factors that enable the translation of
their radical ideology into social, political and religious
movements [13, 14]. Crelinsten [15] states, “both violence and
terrorism possess a logic and grammar that must be understood
if we are to prevent or control them.” Binary labeling as
counter-radical vs. radical does not capture the overlaps,
movement and interactivity among these actors. We observe
[6] that both counter-radical and radical movements in Muslim
societies exhibit distinct combinations of discrete states
comprising various social, political, and religious beliefs,
goals, attitudes and practices, and their discriminating
perspectives can be semi-automatically identified and mapped
onto latent linear continuums or scales.
The model described below defines a seven dimensional
possibility space within which diverse organizations, social
movements, and individuals can be located. The variables are
treated as continuous bipolar scales. Each scale is measured
independently of the others. Social movements exhibit distinct
combinations of discrete social, political, and religious beliefs,
attitudes, and practices that can be mapped onto these latent
linear scales. Scaling is a method for measuring and ordering
entities based on their qualitative attributes.
The choice of scales relies on the work of a combination of
American, European, African, and Southeast Asian scholars
and the literature on similar movements in various regions. The
variables are generalizations based on ethnographic research
that involved observation of public events, extended interviews
and informal conversations with leaders and rank and file
members of organizations and movements, and discourse
analysis. Field work findings and conventional discourse
analysis provided input for automated discourse analysis
conducted using methods relying on key words associated with
each of the variables (described elsewhere). These automated
methods analyzed more than fifty thousand local language
documents obtained with the use of web-mining technology.
The scales used in LookingGlass tools for characterizing
Radical-Islamist and Counter-Radical Islamist movements are:
 Epistemology: This refers to the ways in which religious
groups interpret core texts. Foundationalism is at one end
of a continuum. It fixes meaning in invariant, “literal”
readings of core religious texts. Foundationalists claim that
their readings are ahistorical and not influenced by cultural
considerations. Constructivism is at the other end of the
scale. It acknowledges that all variants of a religious
tradition are constructed in historical, social, and cultural
contexts and they can, and indeed must, change over time.

Proponents of this position maintain that to determine the
meaning of a scriptural passage appropriate for a particular
time, place, and culture, both the context of revelation and
the context of exegesis must be considered.
 Religious Diversity Tolerance: Exclusivists, who insist on
universal adherence to their own beliefs and social norms
and who claim exclusive possession of complete truth, are
at one end. Pluralists, who understand difference as a
social and religious good or theological pluralism, are at
the other. An entity at the extreme pluralist end of the
tolerance scale holds the view that all religions should be
tolerated and that all are based on truths that transcend
confessional and sectarian differences.
 Change Orientation: Change orientation aims to capture
the degree to which an entity wishes to effect social,
political, and/or religious change. It is also a measure of
the degree to which an individual or group attempts to
influence others. Revitalization movements that seek to
destroy the world as it is and rebuild it from scratch are at
one end of the scale. Defenders of the social, political, and
religious status quo are at the other.
 Violence: Violence is defined broadly to include more than
killing, inflicting physical injury, and destruction of
property. Symbolic and discursive violence are included in
this scale because they are often steps leading toward
physical violence. They can cause havoc, especially when
the manipulation of symbols and discourse is purposively
articulated to provoke adversaries, demonize opponents,
incite mobs to action, or to provide justifications for the
“necessity of violence.” Unlike physical violence that can
be seen and clearly understood for what it is, symbolic and
discursive violence are not necessarily self-evident; hence
both require knowledge of their contexts to identify them
and assess their real and potential danger.
Dehumanization, demonization, and the desecration of
sacred places and objects are among the most common and
provocative forms of symbolic violence committed in
contexts of ethnic and religious conflict.
 Violence Ideology scale represents the degree to which an
entity supports or rejects violence as a matter of principle.
Though some of the movements scaled rely on reasoned
argumentation appealing to concepts of justice and
oppression in addition to, or in place of narratives. At one
end are those who would support any type of violence; at
the other are pacifists who are ideologically committed to
nonviolence. A lack of violent rhetoric is insufficient to
classify an organization as pacifist if the organization is
silent in the face of others’ violence violent acts and
violent rhetoric.
 Violence Engagement scale measures the degree to which
an entity engages in any type of violence including
symbolic or discursive violence. At one end of the
continuum are those who have explicitly claimed
responsibility for violent acts. At the other end are those
who have never engaged in any type of violence.

Figure 1. Graphical Scaling Tool

IV.

LOOKINGGLASS TOOLS AND METHODS

A. Graphical Scaling Tool
We designed an intuitive, easy-to-use graphical tool for
defining multiple scales, so that area experts may populate
them with polarities and positions of known social movements
from a certain region. A snapshot of such a graphical scaling
tool is shown in Figure 1, which marks the positions and
polarities of 23 groups from Indonesia on the seven scales
described above.
B. Multi-Lingual Topic Detection
We utilized automated on-line topic detection [16] in text
material. We asked area-experts to scan detected topics and
associate them with the scales that they are relevant. For
example, a partial list of relevant topics for a Political Change
scale for Indonesia include: {sharia, family law, corruption,
democracy, election, secularism, state, constitution, justice}.
C. Discriminative Perspective Mining
The more challeging aspect of textual analysis is
discriminating perspective mining in debates between the
opposing camps on a scale. A debate is a formal discussion on
a set of related topics in a forum, in which opposing arguments
are put forward. For example, a debate on education might
comprise opposing perspectives, such as “secular, multicultural education” vs. “religious, sharia based education”. In
this step, our focus is the development of an automated
perspective mining algorithm, which would contribute to the
understanding of features (i.e. social, political, cultural,
religious beliefs, goals, and practices) shared by one side of a
debate, and by those opposing them. We formulate the
perspective mining problem in a general structured sparse
learning framework [17]. In particular, the logistical regression
formulation fits our application, since it is a dichotomous
classification problem:

In the formula below, ai is the vector representation of the ith
document, wi is the weight assigned to the ith document (wi
=1/m by default), and A=[a1, a2, …, am] is the document
keyword matrix, yi is the polarity of each document based upon
the scale polarity of the actor that the document belongs to, and
the unknown xj , the j-th element of x, is the weight for each
keyword, λ>0 is a regularization parameter that controls the
sparsity of the solution, |x|1= Σ|xi| is 1-norm of the x vector. We
use the SLEP sparse learning package that utilizes gradient

descent approach to solve the above convex and non-smooth
optimization problem. The keyword phrases with non-zero
values on the sparse x vector yields the discriminant
perspectives based on their polarity (positive or negative).
Following table displays radical perspectives for five topics.

Figure 2. Radical Perspectives for Topics

D. Response Tables of NSAs
A response table is calculated based on the normalized
frequency with which actors mention various perspectives, as
indicated by keywords. The median frequency of each
perspective is selected as a threshold. Actors and normalized
perspective frequencies are used to build a dichotomous [0/1]
response matrix. A sample partial response table for the
Violence Ideology scale is presented in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Response Table of Radical Actors on Violence Ideology related
perspectives

E. Rasch Modeling
A true Guttman scale is deterministic, i.e. if an actor
subscribes to a certain perspective, then it must also agree
with all lower order perspectives on the scale. Of course,
perfect order is rare in the social world. The Rasch [18] model
provides a probabilistic framework for Guttman scales to
accommodate incomplete observations and measurement
error. We employ the Rasch model to measure the abilities of
actors on a latent scale, alongside the difficulties of
perspectives on the same scale. By definition, the location of
an item (difficulty) on a scale corresponds to the actor location
(ability) at which there is a 0.5 probability of a response. Once
item locations are scaled, then actor locations are measured on
the scale using the EM-method for joint Maximum Likelihood
Estimation [19]. The following figure (Figure 4) is the radical
actor-perspective map displaying the location of
discriminating perspective (items) as well as the distribution
of actors (subjects) along a Violence Ideology scale:

if a message or a collection of messages from a Tweeter maps
to one polarity or another polarity of a scale (e.g. radical or
not-radical), but also if a message or a messenger classifies as
a follower of one of the known social movement’s rhetoric or
ideology. In our 10-fold cross-validation-based experiments
with 37,000 web pages downloaded from web sites of 23
Islamic organizations (10 radical and 13 non-radical) from
Indonesia, we observed that the linear formulation-based
message classifier, with discriminative perspectives as its
features, achieves over 98% accuracy for predicting the
corresponding polarity of documents. Furthermore, we
observed that logistic formulation-based classifier achieves
over 83% accuracy for predicting the corresponding source (a
particular Islamic organization) of a document. Combined
with longitudinal analysis of an individual’s messages (such as
those that can be observed on Twitter, message boards, blogs,
or in chat rooms), we can determine (i) shifts of individuals
from the status of unaffiliated to affiliated of one of the known
social movements (SM), (ii) growth and shrinkage drivers (i.e.
types of events and narratives) of SMs, and (iii) influential
followers of SMs. In the following section we describe the
design of a real-time dashboard, named LookingGlass (see
Figure. 5), to display all types of flows and hot spots of
Tweeters between radical (red) and non-radical (green) SMs,
their popular keywords, hash tags, event mentions, and media
sources driving their weekly shifts.

Figure 4. A Violence Ideology Scale for Radical Actors

F. Micro Level Analysis of Groups and Individuals
The utilization of the logistic regression formulation
presented in Section IV. C provides a classification model [20]
between different polarities of a scale -- by checking the
polarity of (xT.ai) where xT corresponds to the weights of the
discriminant perspectives relevant to a scale, and ai is the
keyword vector of each Tweeter’s weekly message content.
Using the discriminating perspectives, we can not only detect

Figure 5. A Real-Time Dashboard for Visualizing Shifts and their Flows

V.

LOOKINGGLASS DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE

The following diagram in Figure 6 shows the major
components of the LookingGlass real-time dashboard.

E. Chord Diagram
User-Group mappings are rendered using d3 1 chord
diagram for visualization. All user and group information is
indexed by Apache Solr 2 server, supporting keyword and
parametric search. Google map API 3 was integrated to track
users’ and organizations geographical footprint.
VI.

LOOKINGGLASS DEPLOYMENT

We collected 7 weeks of matching Twitter messages from
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore starting on October 10,
2012. Weekly an average of total tweets was 786,484 and by
unique average 348,227 Tweeters. Weekly statistics of number
of tweets and tweeters are shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8.

Figure 6. LookingGlass Design and system architecture.

Initially we download all documents from web sites of
organizations, followed by discriminant perspective mining.
Next, we utilize Twitter Streaming API to collect all tweets
matching topics and perspectives. We collect tweets from each
user and apply the polarity and group-level classifier to map
tweeters to groups. We display shifts and flows among groups
by utilizing a chord diagram and their geographic footprint
extracted from GPS coded tweets and tweeter’s home pages by
utilizing a heat map.

Figure 7. Total number of weekly Indonesian tweets matching topics and
perspectives.

A. Data Collecting
In the beginning, we invite area experts with field and
domain expertise to create a list of radical and non-radical
organizations and mark their polarity and scaling using the
Graphical Scaling Tool. Next, a web crawler downloads the
web sites and RSS feeds of organizations.
B. Perspective Analysis
Next we utilize the multi-lingual topic detection and
mapping tools described in IV. B, and Discriminative
Perspective Mining algorithm described in IV. C to determine
topics and discriminative features (n-grams) to train linear
regression based polarity level (radical or non) classifier and
logistic regression based group level classifier.
C. Twitter Stream
We subscribe to Twitter streaming API and collect all
messages matching topics and topic-specific perspectives.

Figure 8. Total number of weekly Indonesian tweeters.

Based Tweeter classification results (Section V. D), around
10% of Tweeters’ messages were predicted to match the
perspectives of radical groups and rest of users’ messages
matched the non-radical groups. Figure 9 below shows the
percentages of weekly polarization between radical and nonradical.

D. User Classification
Collected raw data is aggregated weekly by user and we
apply previously trained classifiers to map users to groups
based on topics and perspectives mentioned in their tweets.
1

http://d3js.org

2

http://lucene.apache.org/solr/

3

https://developers.google.com/maps/

Figure 9. Weekly radical and non-radical polarities of Tweeters.

In order to detect shifts, we utilized the Rasch Model scaling
of organizations discussed in Section IV. E. Figure 10 below
shows the polarities of the radical and non-radical lists of
organizations we analyzed, and their rankings from neutral-toextreme positions on both sides. For instance, if a tweeters
messages were classified to a radical organization during a
previous week, but next week the Tweeter’s messages were
classified to a non-radical organization, then we consider the
user’s shift as “counter-radicalized”. Similarly, if Tweeter’s
messages were classified to a non-radical group, or a radical
group of a lower order during a previous week, and then that
user’s messages were classifier to a radical group of an higher
order the following week then we labeled the shift as
“radicalized”. The joint polarity and ranking table and two
possible shift directions are shown below in Figure 10.

Figure 11.Weekly radicalized / counter radicalized shifts - percentages.

radical groups by the group level classifier, then we label that
user as “Unaffiliated Radical”. A similar reasoning also
applies to detect “Unaffiliated Counter-Radical”.
a) An event was among the most popular tweets of 370
Unaffiliated Radicals between Oct.10.2012 and Oct.17.2012.
b) The event was a salafi student protest and the violent
reaction by the security forces against them at North Sulawesi,
Indonesia.
c) This “radicalizing” event can be detected by selecting
the “Unaffiliated Radical” segment on the chord diagram and
checking the popular URL’s mentioned in tweets. Clicking on
the corresponding URL pops-up the article titled “Demo
Cagub, Polisi Hajar Mahasiswa” from its original media
source http://sindikasi.inilah.com/. (Figure 12)

Figure 10. Weekly opinion shifts in tweets.

Weekly opinion shifts for 7 weeks are shown in Figure 11.
An average percentage of radicalized opinion shifts was around
15%, average percentage of counter radicalized opinion shifts
was 70%, and approximately 15% of users preserved their
previous weekly position exactly.
Figure 12. Event based users’ opinion tracking

VII. LOOKINGGLASS USE SCENARIOS
In this section, we present three different scenarios for
demonstrating the utility of the LookingGlass platform. All the
scenarios are drawn from real social movement and Tweeter
streams.
1) A Protest Event highlighted by Non-Affiliated Radicals.
If a Tweeter’s weekly message content gets classified as
“Radical”, but the user does not classify to one of the known

2) A Radical Group’s Local Followers.
a) Clicking on one of the radical groups on the chord
diagram shows the geographic footprint of their followers.
b) A group of followers were detected at “The Tun
Dr.Ismail International School of Johor”, in Padang Tengku,
Malaysia.

Figure 13. A Radical Group’s local followers

c) One of tweeters on the corresponding user list, is the
official twitter account of the organization itself highlighing
Khilafah goals. Another one of the tweeters on the user list,
talks about protests, jihad, mujahideen and displays the image
of a militia group on the background image of his Tweeter
page. (Figure 13)
3) A Radical Group’s Transnational Followers.
a) Selecting another radical group on the chord diagram,
reveals a group of followers exchanging messages from
Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
b) One of the popular URLs shared among these
transnational group of users is an article on a missile attack
into Israeli territory by a terrorist organization.
c) Following figure (Figure 14) shows the selected
organization with a trans-national follower footprnt on the
Chord Diagram, corresponding popular article and its media
source.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by US DoDs Minerva
Research Initiative Grant N00014-09-1-0815, Project leader:
Prof. Mark Woodward, Arizona State University, and the
project name is “Finding Allies for the War of Words:
Mapping the Diffusion and Influence of Counter-Radical
Muslim Discourse”.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
Figure 14. A Radical Group’s transnational followers.
[7]
[8]

[9]

G. Goertz, Social science concepts : a user’s guide, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press., 2006.
G. Goertz and J. Mahoney, "Two-Level Theories and Fuzzy-Set
Analysis," Sociological Methods Research, vol. 33, pp. 497-538, 2005.
H. Davulcu, S. Ahmed, S. Gokalp, H. Temkit, T. Taylor, M. Woodward
and A. Amin, “Analyzing Sentiment Markers Describing Radical and
Counter-Radical Elements in Online News,” in IEEE Symposium on
Social Intelligence and Networking (SIN-10), pp. 335-340, 2010.
S. Tikves, S. Banerjee, H. Temkit, S. Gokalp, H. Davulcu, A. Sen, S.
Corman, M. Woodward, R. I. and A. Amin, “A System for Ranking
Organizations using Social Scale Analysis,” in Proc. of the International
Symposium on Open Source Intelligence & Web Mining (OSINT-WM),
2011.
S. Tikves, S. Gokalp, M. Temkit, S. Banerjee, J. Ye and H. Davulcu,
"Perspective Analysis for Online Debates," Proceedings of International
Symposium on Foundation of Open Source Intelligence and Security
Informatics (FOISINT-SI), 2012.
S. Tikves, S. Banerjee, H. Temkit, S. Gokalp, H. Davulcu, A. Sen, S.
Corman, M. Woodward, I. Rohmaniyah and A. Amin, " A System for
Ranking Organizations Using Social Scale Analysis," Social Network
Analysis and Mining Journal, Vols. ISSN (Print) 1869-5450 - ISSN
(Online) 1869-5469, pp. 1-16, 2012.
L. Guttman, “The basis for scalogram analysis,” Measurement and
prediction, vol. 4, pp. 60-90, 1950.
E. Durkheim, “The cultural logic of collective representations,” in
Social theory the multicultural and classic readings , Wesleyan
University: Westview Press, 2004, pp. 90-99.
G. Simmel, Sociological Theory, New York: McGraw–Hill, 2008.

[10] A. Wallace, “Revitalization Movements,” American Anthropologist, vol.
58, pp. 264-281, 1956.
[11] A. Bayat, Making Islam Democratic: Social Movements and the PostIslamist Turn, Stanford University Press, 2007.
[12] C. Tilly, Social Movements, Boulder, Colorado, USA: Paradigm
Publishers, 2004.
[13] G.-M. J., "The rhetoric and reality: radicalization and political
discourse," International Political Science Review, vol. 33, no. 5, pp.
556-567, 2012.
[14] G.-M. J., "The rhetoric and reality: radicalization and political
discourse," International Political Science Review, vol. 33, no. 5, pp.
556-567, 2012.
[15] R. Crelinsten, "Analysing terrorism and counter-terrorism: A
communication model," Terrorism and Political Violence, vol. 14, p.
77–122, 2002.

View publication stats

[16] L. AlSumait, D. Barbara and C. Domeniconi, "On-line LDA: Adaptive
Topic Models for Mining Text Streams with Applications to Topic
Detection and Tracking," in Eighth IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (ICDM '08), 2008.
[17] J. Liu, J. Chen and J. Ye, "Large-scale sparse logistic regression," in
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2009.
[18] D. Andrich, Rasch models for measurement, Sage, 1988.
[19] Y. Pawitan, In all likelihood: statistical modelling and inference using
likelihood., Oxford University Press, 2001.
[20] R. Tibshirani, "Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,"
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 267288, 1996.

