Perspective Analysis for Online Debates
Sukru Tikves, Sedat Gokalp, Mhamed Temkit, Sujogya Banerjee, Jieping Ye, Hasan Davulcu
Arizona State University, P.O. Box 87-8809, Tempe, AZ, 85281 USA
{Sukru.Tikves, Sedat.Gokalp, Mhamed.Temkit, Sujogya.Banerjee, Jieping.Ye, Hasan.Davulcu}@asu.edu
Tel:(602) 206-8641, Fax: (480) 965-2751

Abstract—Internet and social media devices created a new
public space for online debate on political and social topics.
A debate is defined as a formal discussion on a set of related
topics in a public meeting, in which opposing perspectives and
arguments are put forward. In this paper, we develop automated
perspective discovery techniques which would contribute to the
understanding of features (i.e. social, political, cultural, religious
beliefs, goals, and practices) shared by each side of the debate.
Secondly, we show that, compared to a semi-automated process,
our perspective discovery algorithms not only identify larger
number of relevant features, but they also yield a higher accuracy
scaling of moderate to extreme organizations on both sides of a
debate.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Internet and social media devices created a new public space
for debate on political and social topics [1], [2]. Hotly debated
issues span all spheres of human activity; from liberal vs.
conservative politics, to radical vs. counter-radical religious
debate, to climate change debate in scientific community.
Many prominent ’camps’ have emerged within Internet debate
rhetoric and practice [3]. There are many applications [4]–[8]
for recognizing politically-oriented sentiment in texts.
A debate is defined as a formal discussion on a set of related
topics in a public meeting, in which opposing arguments
are put forward. Initially, we observe that given a certain
topic, each organization’s web site mostly discusses their own
perspectives related to that topic, and occasionally discusses
others’ perspectives, relating them back to their own perspectives. As a case study of an ongoing large scale online debate,
we utilize the discourse found in the web sites of 10 radical,
and 13 counter-radical Indonesian religious organizations comprising a total of 37,000 articles dating from 2001 to 2011.
Radicalism [9] is the ideological conviction that it is acceptable
and in some cases obligatory to use violence to effect profound
political, cultural and religious transformations and change the
existing social order. Counter-radicals oppose violent social
and political movements.
In our prior work [10] we showed that both counter-radical
and radical movements in Muslim societies exhibit distinct
combinations of perspectives on various social, political, and
religious issues, and those perspectives can be mapped to
a latent linear continuum, or a scale. The resulting model
allowed us to measure the distance between organizations
and movements over the underlying scale. It also facilitates
tracking the ways in which movements and organizations
change over time and space [11].

In [10], we utilized a simple term frequency - inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) [12] based technique to generate a
large candidate list of topics and perspectives for inclusion in
scaling analysis. Top 100 n-grams from each organization’s
web site were collected into a list of candidate keywords.
Next, we asked social scientists to scan this list manually, and
identify all significant keywords belonging to social, political,
economic, and religious perspectives. During this process,
social scientists on our team assessed a total of 790 candidate
keywords; of which 29 and 26 were selected by experts for
inclusion in the radical and counter-radical scaling analysis
respectively.
Upon analyzing the results of this study, we have identified
that automatically generating the items of the radical and
counter-radical scales would be an important contribution to
the research. For example, among the included scale items
were phrases like “religious education”. However, reaching
that item from a seed topic (like “education”), instead of
manual selection would be desirable. This would not only
decrease the expert intervention in scale generation, it would
also provide us with useful perspective of organizations on
these topics aligned with the underlying scale. In order to
explore this idea, we have developed methods for perspective
analysis built upon previous findings of the scaling research.
In this paper, our primary contribution is the development
of automated perspective discovery techniques which would
contribute to the understanding of features (i.e. social, political, cultural, religious beliefs, goals, and practices) shared by
one side of a debate, and by those opposing them. Secondly,
we show that, our perspective discovery algorithms not only
identify larger number of relevant features - compared to the
semi-automated process, but also yield a higher accuracy scale
of radicalism vs. counter-radicalism.
II. P ROBLEM D EFINITION
In this study, we would like to automatically discover the
perspectives of organizations on a given set of topics, and
extract the underlying discourse scale. Here, a scale is a social
science model to measure the positioning of organizations on
a latent dimension. We would like this generated scale to fit
both the theoretical model, and also be able to mimic expert
level deduction in the domain.
For our specific instance, we have utilized Rasch model [13]
as the probabilistic version of a Guttman scale, and web
mining techniques for producing response tables from organizations’ corpora. We have utilized the opinion of our experts

on Indonesian Islamic religious organizations as the target gold
standard of orderings of these organizations.
III. M ETHODS AND T HEORY
A. Overall System Model
We devised an end-to-end pipeline of methods that would
generate two sets of perspectives for each of the polarities of
a scale, starting from a mined web corpus, and a list of topics
provided by experts.
Overall flow of the system consists of data gathering from
experts, and web mining, manual topic selection, perspective
analysis, and scale generation.
B. Scaling
In social science scaling is a process of measuring and
ordering entities such as subjects based on their qualitative
attributes called items. In general, subjects respond to surveys
in form of interviews or questionnaires, where items are
presented to the subjects in form of questions. Some of the
widely followed scaling procedures in social science are Likert
scale [14], Thurstone scale [15], and Guttman scale [16].
Guttman scaling procedure orders both the subjects and the
items simultaneously with respect to some underlying latent
cumulative continuum. In this study, items tend to have a
natural total ordering to partial ordering, since an organization
support for keyword such as “Sharia” will most likely imply
their support for the keyword “Quran”, we used the Guttman
scaling to rank the organizations based on their response on
the radical and counter-radical keywords.
A Guttman [17] scale presents a number of items to which
each subject is requested to provide a dichotomous response,
e.g. agree/disagree, yes/no, or 1/0. This scaling procedure is
based on the premise that the items have strict orders (i.e., the
items are presented to the subjects ranked according to the
level of the item’s difficulty). An item “A” is said to be “more
difficult” than an item “B” if any subject answering “yes”
on item “A” implies that the subject will also answer “yes”
on item “B”. A subject who responds to an item positively
is expected to respond positively to all the items of lesser
difficulty.
Guttman scale is a deterministic process and the score of
a subject depends on the number of affirmative responses he
has made on the items. Scores in Guttman scale can also be
interpreted as the “ability” of a subject in answering questions
sorted in increasing order of “difficulty”. These scores when
presented on an underlying scale, give us an ordering of the
subjects based on their “ability” too.
The objective of our paper is to order the Indonesian
Islamic organizations based on their views on religio-social
keywords which have an inherent ordering. An organization
supporting “Sharia” will also likely to believe in “Quran”. So
it makes sense to use Guttman scaling procedure to rank the
organizations and their beliefs and practices. One drawback of
Guttman scale is that it is deterministic and assumes a strict
ordering of the items. We used Rasch [18] model to overcome
this drawback, by providing a probabilistic framework for

Guttman scales. Specifically, in the simple Rasch model, the
probability of a positive response (yes) is modeled as a logistic
function of the difference between the subject and item’s
parameters. Item parameters pertain to the difficulty of items
while subject parameters pertain to the ability of subjects
who are assessed. A subject of higher ability relative to the
difficulty of an item, has higher probability to respond to a
question affirmatively. In this paper Rasch models are used to
assess the organizations degree of being radical or counterradical based on the religio-social keywords (items) appearing
in their rhetoric.
Rasch model maps the responses of the subjects to the items
in binary or dichotomous format , i.e., 1 or 0. Let Bernoulli
variable Xvi denotes the response of a subject v to the item
i, variable θv denotes the parameter of “ability” of the subject
v and βi denotes the parameter of “difficulty” of an item i.
According to the Rasch model the probability that subject v
responds 1 for item i is given by
P (Xvi = 1|θv , βi ) =

exp(θv − βi )
1 + exp(θv − βi )

The maximum likelihood method is used to provide estimates for subject and item parameters. We can also assess
whether the data fits the model by looking at goodness of
fit indices, such as the Andersen’s likelihood ratio test (LRtest) [19]. A p-value, returned by the test, indicates the
goodness of fit and a p-value higher than 0.05 indicates no
presence of lack of fit. We used the eRm [20] package to run
the Rasch models
C. Implementing Rasch Model in the Text Mining Domain
Other works in text-mining domain such as sentiment
analysis, have used Rasch model in their analysis [21]. In
our application, Rasch model subjects correspond to a group
of religious organizations, and items correspond to a set
of keywords for socio-cultural, political, religious radical
and counter-radical beliefs, and practices. An organization
responding “yes” to a feature means the organization exhibits
that feature in its narrative, while an organization responding
“no” to a feature indicates that the organization does not
exhibit such a feature. Difficulty of an item translates to
strength of the corresponding attitude in defining radical or
counter-radical ideology of any organization. Similarly ability
of a subject in this case means the degree of radicalism or
counter-radicalism exhibited by an organization’s rhetoric.
D. Our Initial Work on Scale Generation
Our initial work [10] depended on more direct interaction
with experts’ opinion to build a model that can capture the
underlying dynamics of the scale. The experts both provided
a set of target organizations, and also directly selected the
items that would make up the scale, from a machine generated
candidate list. The candidate list consisted of the union of top100 n-grams from each organization’s individual corpus, which
were a total of 790 items. The resulting scale has utilized a
total of 55 of keywords selected by experts.

E. Debates and Perspective Analysis
Upon inspecting the keywords selected by our team of experts we observed that, some of these keywords correspond to
differing perspectives on a set of topics that are debated within
these web sites. Definition of debate is “a formal discussion on
a particular topic in a public meeting or legislative assembly, in
which opposing arguments are put forward.”1 . During a debate
on a particular topic, like education, both radical and counterradical organizations discuss different perspectives – such as
“secular multi-cultural education” vs. “sharia based religious
education”.
During the design of an automated perspective detection
algorithm, we made the following simplifying assumptions:
1) Organizations will mostly discuss their own perspective
in a debate;
2) Organizations will occasionally mention others’ perspectives, however, then relate them back to their own
perspective.
In our upcoming work [11], we present a mathematical
formulation of the perspective keyword generation problem
for a given topic, and provide an NP-Completeness proof of
this problem, and design an exact solution through an ILP
(integer linear programming) based solver.
The input to this algorithm also takes the polarity suggestion
from experts into consideration, for automatically identifying
the discriminating perspectives of those organizations from
opposite sides of a debate.
However, due to the algorithmic complexity and the strict
constraints of the exact model, the ILP based solver was not
always able to produce acceptable solutions. Namely, for larger
debated topics, the runtime requirements2 exceeded acceptable
limits of the study, and for more intervened debates, none of
the possible item sets could satisfy strict constraints of the ILP
definition.
In order to resolve this, in our current version of the system,
we have worked with a feature selection framework, SLEP.
The discussion of the implementation of SLEP is discussed in
the next section.
F. SLEP: A Sparse Learning Package
In order to address the scalability problem encountered in
ILP we resorted to SLEP [22], again with the underlined
motivation to select a subset of discriminating features that can
(a) classify and (b) satisfy Guttman scale [16]. The following
steps describe our algorithm:
1) For each topic, calculate the frequency of the words occurring within a fixed size window of the topic keyword
2) Filter the term × document matrix to include only the
most frequent 1000 words from each camp
3) Formulate the problem in a general sparse learning frame
[22]. Logistic formulation fits our application, since it is
a dichotomous classification problem
1 Oxford

Online Dictionary
data volume projections, we have estimated an upper bound of one
hour runtime restriction per topic. For this paper, we have run the cplex ILP
solver several hours for each topic before a timeout.
2 Given

min
x

m
X

wi log(1 + exp(−yi (xT ai + c))

(1)

i=1

+ λ|x|1
ρ
+ ||x||22
2

(2)
(3)

where Di is the document i and Fj is the feature (word) j.
A is the term × document matrix with all Aij ≥ 0, yi ∈ y is
the class of each document Di coded as +1 for Radical (R)
and -1 for Counter-Radical (CR) and xj is the weight for each
feature Fj . Let us explain further the three terms involved in
the convex optimization problem.
Pm
T
•
i=1 wi log(1 + exp(−yi (x ai + c)), this first term is
related to the logistic classification error. We set the
weights wi values to be all 1 so that all documents have
the same weight.
• λ|x|1 , this term involving the L1 norm deals with the
sparsity of the solution vector x. We experienced with
several lambda values which resulted with an x vector of
various sparsity.
ρ
2
• 2 ||x||2 , this last term deals with the ridge regression,
which is an extra level of shrinkage. We set the weight
of this term ρ = 0 as we were mainly driven by sparsity.
• We used the M ATLAB implementation of the SLEP package3 which utilizes gradient descent approach to solve
the aforementioned optimization problem. This package
can handle matrices of 20M entries within a couple of
seconds on a machine with standard configuration.
• The features with non-zero values on the x vector are the
candidate discriminants. Let FR , where xj > 0 be the
discriminant for the R class. Similarly, let FCR , where
xj < 0 be the discriminant for the CR class due to
the coding schema in step 3. Given that the optimized
formulation resulted with a sparse x vector, most of the
words Fj had xj = 0 and hence were not included in
either FR or FCR .
Note that the sets of features FR and FCR may not satisfy the
Guttman pattern. These sets needed to be further filtered such
0
0
⊆ FR and FCR
⊆ FCR would satisfy the Guttman
that FR
pattern.
IV. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
A. Data gathering
Initially, social scientists were invited to use their domain
and area expertise to identify a set of organizations, and
hypothesize any number of unipolar or bipolar scales that
could explain the variance among their beliefs and practices.
Next, a set of web crawling scripts were created for extraction
of articles from those organizations’ web sites. For each organization’s corpus we extracted their original text in Indonesian,
and stored the corpus in a ZIP file.
3 http://http://www.public.asu.edu/œjye02/Software/SLEP

B. Feature Extraction

Fig. 1.

After identifying the features for the analysis, we iterate
over the documents in the corpus of each organization for the
matching items. This yields a feature-document matrix.
This feature extraction task was performed in a simple
three step procedure; initially the occurrence frequencies of
particular features were counted within each organization’s
corpus, then a threshold matrix was calculated from these initial values, and finally a binary response matrix was generated
by applying these thresholds to the initial values.
The frequency metric is shown in formula 4, where k is the
keyword, o is the organization, and Do is the document set
pertaining to that particular organization.
fo,k =

|{d | k ∈ d, d ∈ Do }|
|Do |

(4)

A threshold value for each keyword is calculated from the
values in the related column. And then, each element was
converted into a binary value by comparing it to the column’s
threshold.
C. Model Fitting
We fit the Rasch model on two datasets - (1) radical
organizations with radical keywords and (2) counter-radical
organizations with counter-radical keywords. We used the eRm
package in R, an open source statistical software package4 , to
fit a Rasch model to the dataset, and obtain the organizations’
scores on the latent scale, which are the subject parameter
estimates (θv ) discussed in previous section. The eRm package5 fits Rasch models and provides subjects or organizations
parameter estimates.
D. Feature Expansion Algorithm
We have observed that including all of the newly discovered
features in the scale resulted a poor performance. This is
because, they neither provided the desired Guttman pattern,
nor the resulting scale aligned with the expert opinion. However, exhaustively enumerating all possible subsets to find an
optimal one would also be undesirable due to time complexity.
Thus we have devised a greedy expansion based algorithm to
select the items that make up the scale. It chooses a sufficiently
optimal subset of these features by expanding an initial set,
incrementally adding features that offer a higher performance.
One possible implementation is shown in the algorithm in
Fig. 1. This greedy algorithm will start from an initial set of
features I, and iteratively select the features that increase the
performance of the solution. The performance of a solution
is evaluated by the S OLVE function, which takes a candidate
input, and returns the performance value according to expert
agreement.
Each iteration of the loop (lines 3 – 15) tries to iteratively
expand the current set of selected features (lines 12 – 14).
First, it evaluates the performance of the currently selected
4 http://cran.r-project.org/
5 http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/erm/

Feature set expansion algorithm

1:

procedure G REEDY-S ELECTION(I, C, .)
initial features I
candidate features C
comparison function .

2:
3:
4:

S←I
repeat
m ← S OLVE(S)
N ←∅
for all c ∈ C \ S do
p ← S OLVE(S ∪ {c})
if p . m then
N ← N ∪ {c}
end if
end for
if N 6= ∅ then
S ←S∪N
end if
until N = ∅
return S
end procedure

5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:

subset (line 4), and then identifies each not yet selected feature
that provides a performance increase (lines 7 – 8), and finally
collects them into the selected feature set for the next iteration
(lines 5, and 8 – 10). When it can no longer include any new
features, the algorithm will terminate.
Another performance trade-off was done using the natural
grouping of the features. Since the features in our problem are
grouped by topic, we decided to keep these natural groupings,
thus making each c in set C a collection of features.
Here the . comparison function will assume greater-thanor-equal-to semantics. This is because, while we want to have
the best possible scoring features as possible, we also want to
be able to have a larger set of perspectives that can be used
to explain the underlying latent scale.
In order to be able to handle the case of an empty initial
feature set (I), we expanded the algorithm as shown in Fig. 2.
This modification (to lines 6 – 11 in the original algorithm)
will choose the best available features in the first iteration that
are within a score difference of δ of each other. This also
assumes S OLVE function will return a sensible upper limit
value when an empty set is given as its input.
E. eRm Iterative Item Elimination Algorithm
While the eRm Rasch analysis package already does trivial
eliminations in the model (for example, ignoring full/empty
1/0 responses), it also provides an algorithm to clean up
a model from features that do not adhere to the Rasch
model/Guttman pattern.
The overall idea of the algorithm is summarized in the algorithm in Fig. 3. While our greedy feature selection algorithm
worked by expanding a set of features, this algorighm works
by going the opposite direction, and reducing the feature set

Fig. 2.
Feature set expansion algorithm modification, enabling special
handling of the empty initial set of features
1: for all c ∈ C do
2:
p ← S OLVE(S ∪ {c})
3:
if p . m then
4:
if S = ∅ ∧ p − m < δ then
5:
N ← {c}
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:

Rasch Model (RM) m
Evaluation Function E VAL

5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:

The quadrants model

m←p
else
N ← N ∪ {c}
end if
end if
end for

Fig. 3. Feature elimination algorithm provided by the eRm package
1: procedure S TEP W ISE I T (m, E VAL )

2:
3:
4:

Fig. 4.

r←m
repeat
e ← E VAL(r)
if not F ITS(e) then
i ← L OWEST R ANKED F EATURE(e)
x ← r$x \ {i}
r ← RM(x)
end if
until Max # of Steps, or F ITS(e)
return r
end procedure

in each step. Here $ is the R member access operator, where
r$x is the feature set of rasch model object r, and \ is set
difference. Functions E VAL, and L OWEST R ANKED F EATURE
are references to eRm provided facilities to evaluate, and find
the worst contributing item of Rasch models.
V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In order to measure the relation of the generated perspectives to the underlying scale, we have performed a series of
experiments designed to compare their scaling capabilities to
the gold standard ordering done by the experts.
A. Indonesian Corpus
The corpus domain is the online articles published by the
web sites of the 23 religious organizations identified in Indonesia, in the Indonesian language. These sources are the web
sites or blogs of the identified think tanks and organizations.
As discussed in the introduction, each source was classified
as either radical or counter-radical by the area experts. We
downloaded a total of 37,000 Indonesian articles published in
these 23 web sites, dating from 2001 to 2011.
B. The Quadrants Model
Our project leverages the results of our previous work,
which relied on social theory including Durkheim’s research

on collective representations [23], Simmel’s work on conflict
and social differentiation [24], Wallace’s writings on revitalization movements [25], and Tilly and Bayat’s studies on
contemporary social movement theory [26] [27]. Our team
has also developed, and is currently testing a theoretically
based class model comprised of continuous latent scales. The
first pair of scales focus on distinctions between the goals and
methods of counter-radical and radical discourse, and capture
the degree to which individuals, groups, and behaviors aim
to influence the social order (Change Orientation) and the
methods by which they attempt to do so (Change Strategies).
Quadrants model (see Figure 4) captures multiple social
trends in four quadrants A, B, C, and D, and it makes
the significant distinction between violent and not-violent
dimensions of both radicalisms and counter radicalisms. Using
the quadrants model, a researcher can locate organizations,
individuals, and discourses in broader categories while still
considering subtle differences between groups within categories. A researcher can document movement and trends from
category to category, and identify points where movement is
likely.
C. Expert Opinion and Gold Standard of Rankings
We collaborated with three area experts, who collectively
possess 35 years of scholarly expertise on Indonesia and
Islam. We utilized a homegrown graphical drag-and-drop user
interface to collect their opinion to build the gold standard of
the rankings. A screenshot of this tool is shown in Figure 5.
Each expert separately evaluated and ranked the organizations in the dataset according to a two dimensional scale
of radical / counter-radical (R/CR) and violent / non-violent
(V/NV) axis. The consensus among the experts was high; since
per item standard deviations among the experts’ scores along
the R/CR axis over a range of [−10, 10], across all organizations were 2.75. The individual scores for each organization
were combined and averaged to obtain the consensus gold
standard rankings along the hypothesized R/CR scale.
In this paper, we used two measures for evaluating the difference between two separate rankings, based on Spearman’s
footrule and Spearman’s correlation coefficient. The original
work utilized a mean displacement based measure as follows:

Fig. 5. The visual interface of the expert opinion collector for manually
placing the organizations on the two dimensional scale

In order to have a baseline for comparison of the automatically generated items, we have opted to use this scale in our
current study.
E. Candidate Perspectives
We have run both the ILP, and the SLEP based feature
generators on all the 50 topics that has been identified. ILP was
able to identify perspectives for 18 of the topics, while failed
for the rest, due to either finding no viable exact solution, or
timeouts. This resulted in a total of 2869 perspectives, with
159 average on each topic. Since these exact features also
included items with very low support, we have filtered these
results to include only the ones with higher frequency in the
corpus. The final set contained a total of 227 perspectives on
all 18 solved topics. On the other hand, SLEP was able to
successfully generate candidate perspective on every 50 topic,
totaling 1065 perspectives, with an average of 21 on each
topic.

Given two discrete ordering functions G, and R, on the
organization set O, the normalized displacement of a single
organization is given as:
disp(G, R, O, o) =

|G(o) − R(o)|
|O|

(5)

Here, O is the set of organizations, G and R are one to one
mapping functions of rankings from set O to range [1, |O|].
Then overall error measure for a given set of rankings was
then defined as:
error(G, R, O) =

X disp(G, R, O, o)
|O|

(6)

o∈O

In addition to this measure, we have also opted to include another measurement to take stability of the items into
consideration. Based on the L2 − N orm of the normalized
displacement function, the msd measure can be defined as
the following:
msd(G, R, O) =

X disp(G, R, O, o)2
|O|

(7)

o∈O

Since our initial work, we have also modified the evaluation
of the missing items. Specifically, for empty/full response
patterns, the Rasch model would not be able to make any
inference. Since we experimented with dynamic features, and
the missing items varied in each test, we have opted to position
them in their neutral places. This change has introduced a
slight difference from the experimental results of our original
study.
D. Baseline Performance
In our previous study [10] we have automatically generated
a Rasch model from the organizational corpus data, and the
expert selected items. We have observed that, against several
baseline algorithms, including score sorting, and principal
component analysis, the Rasch model was able to demonstrate
the best available performance, and was ranked at expert level.

F. Aligning Perspectives with the Scales
In order to identify the perspectives that make up the
theoretical scale we are working on (R/CR bi-polar scales on
Indonesian Islamic religious organizations), we have devised
a set of experiments that measure their relation to the Rasch
model, and the expectation of field experts.
Initially, as a baseline, we have re-run the original scale with
the expert selected features, with the new evaluation metrics.
The mean displacement of the features was 0.1172, while
the mean square displacement score was 0.0287. (The slight
difference with the original paper is due to the handling of the
missing items, discussed in Section V-C).
In order to observe the effect of the S TEP W ISE I T, we have
run the elimination algorithm on the original set of features.
The mean displacement was decreased to 0.1115, while the
mean square displacement stayed the same. The algorithm has
eliminated 15 features to reach this score. The summary of
these experiments can be seen in Table I
TABLE I
E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR THE ORIGINAL EXPERT SELECTED FEATURE
BASED SCALES

Original
Original + S TEP W ISE I T

error
0.1172
0.1115

msd
0.0287
0.0287

run time
14s
53s

G. The Initial Experiments with Feature Expansion
After establishing the baseline, we evaluated the perspective
based features discovered by the ILP solver. First we built a
model including all the candidate features proposed by the
solver. This resulted in an mean displacement of 0.1323 and
mean square displacement of 0.0284. While the performance
was near the expert level, the hand selected features performed
(13%) better than this initial run.
Then the features were refined with S TEP W ISE I T, and our
G REEDY-S ELECTION algorithms. The S TEP W ISE I T failed to
provide better results, and actually performed worse, with

TABLE II
T HE TOPICS CHOSEN BE THE G REEDY-S ELECTION ALGORITHM FROM THE
CANDIDATE PERSPECTIVES OF THE ILP SOLUTION .
Iteration
1

Topics
kufur
disbelief

2

kdrt, kekafiran, kesetaraan, konstitusional,
multikultural, sekularisme, tabligh, toleransi
(domestic violence, infidelity, equality, constitutional,
multicultural, secularism, tabligh, tolerance)

3

bunuh, gender, homoseksual, musyrikin, syirik
(suicide, gender, homosexuals, idolaters, paganism)

mean displacement of 0.1632, and mean square displacement
of 0.0386, while failing the LR−test for Rasch model fitness.
The likely reason for this is that S TEP W ISE I T performs item
eliminated locally based on individual item fitness, but the
sparse nature causes loss of global Guttman pattern.
When we built an optimum item set from scratch using
the G REEDY-S ELECTION algorithm, we were able to identify
14 topics that contributed with better fitting perspectives.
The expanding topic sets can be seen in Table II. The final
solution had a mean displacement of 0.1020, with a mean
square displacement of 0.0189. An additional cleanup using
the S TEP W ISE I T algorithm over this existing solution did not
produce better results.
The summary of these experiments can be seen in Table III.
TABLE III
S CALING EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ILP SOLVER BASED DATA

ILP
ILP + StepWiseIt
Greedy(ILP)
Greedy(ILP) + StepWiseIt

error
0.1323
0.1632
0.1020
0.1122

msd
0.0284
0.0386
0.0182
0.189

run time
3m:38s
56m:47s

H. SLEP Based Features
In addition to the ILP based exact features, we also ran
separate experiments for the SLEP output. These yielded a
total of 449 features on counter radical, and 616 features on
the radical scales. The overall runtime duration was 6 hours
and 4 minutes. The resulting scales had a mean displacement
of 0.1398 and mean square displacement of 0.0312. We opted
not to run the S TEP W ISE I T on this particular case, since the
expected runtime would be in the order of weeks, which would
not be practical for the real life conditions of the project.
TABLE IV
S CALING EXPERIMENTS WITH THE SLEP SOLVER BASED DATA

SLEP
Greedy(SLEP)

error
0.1398
0.0982

msd
0.0312
0.0189

run time
6h:04m

Like the ILP based candidates, we also ran the G REEDYS ELECTION algorithm on the SLEP input (Table IV). Over two
iterations, the algorithm was able to identify 15 topics, whose

Fig. 6. Runtime performance of the Rasch model fitting algorithm in the
eRm package. The x axis corresponds to the number of items, while the y axis
represents the runtime length in seconds. Notice that the scatter plot shows
fitness to the x2 polynomial prediction line.

TABLE V
T HE TOPICS CHOSEN BE THE G REEDY-S ELECTION ALGORITHM FROM THE
CANDIDATE PERSPECTIVES OF THE SLEP SOLUTION .
Iteration
1
2

Topics
manusia
(human)
beragama, bunuh, dakwah, demokrasi, jihad,
kafir, kristen, liberal, multikultural, pluralisme,
politik, sipil, syariat, syirik
(religion, kill, propaganda, democracy, jihad,
infidel, Christian, liberal, multicultural, pluralism,
political, civil, Sharia, polytheism)

perspectives were closely related to the underlying scale. The
expanding topic set can be seen in Table V. The best mean
displacement achieved was 0.0982, with a corresponding mean
square displacement of 0.0189.
The main reason that this table does not share a significant
amount of topics with the ILP based topic set, is that the ILP
solver could not provide results for the great majority of the
topics selected by SLEP. The common ones, like “multikultural”, “syirik” were selected in both, while similar topics (like
“politik”/”konstitusional”) were chosen when available.
I. Sample perspectives
A set of sample perspectives selected by the ILP solver are
displayed in Figure 7. Here the columns represent individual
topics, while two rows correspond to radical, and counterradical perspectives on these topics. The items have been
machine translated from Indonesian into English.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have implemented a perspective identification algorithm, with exact, and approximate solutions, and
also tested the viability of this algorithm, by trying to apply
the discovered perspectives on an underlying bi-polar social
scale.
In relation to our previous work, we have increased the
automation in the scale generation process, by abstracting the
hand selected items to automatically discovered perspectives
from topics, and also increased the overall efficiency of the
system, by producing lower distance to the expert agreement.

Fig. 7. A sample set of perspectives generated by the ILP based solver. Here each row represents a debate topic, while the linear scales represent the
locations of the perspectives. The left side items are the counter-radical, and the right side items are the radical perspectives in each of these topics.

The theorized greedy growth based algorithm demonstrated
the best available performance in our experiments. Additionally both ILP, and SLEP based perspective generation
techniques provided features that fit the underlying bi-polar
scale.
Our future work includes reducing the expert interaction
further by automatically discovering debate topics, and investigating a possible use of these perspective analysis techniques
in the related field of sentiment analysis.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Papacharissi, “The virtual sphere: the internet as a public sphere,”
New Media Society, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 9–27, Mar. 2002. [Online].
Available: http://nms.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/4/1/9
[2] I. Himelboim, “Civil society and online political discourse: The network
structure of unrestricted discussions,” Communication Research, Oct.
2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0093650210384853
[3] L. Dahlberg, “The internet and democratic discourse: Exploring the
prospects of online deliberative forums extending the public sphere,”
pp. 615–633, Dec. [Online]. Available: http://www.ingentaconnect.com/
content/routledg/rics/2001/00000004/00000004/art00007
[4] T. Mullen and R. Malouf, “A preliminary investigation into sentiment
analysis of informal political discourse,” in AAAI symp. on computational approaches to analysing weblogs (AAAI-CAAW), 2006, pp. 159–
162.
[5] R. Malouf and T. Mullen, Graph-based user classification for informal
online political discourse, 2007.
[6] M. Thomas, B. Pang, and L. Lee, “Get out the vote: Determining
support or opposition from congressional floor-debate transcripts,” in
In Proceedings of EMNLP, 2006, pp. 327–335.
[7] M. Bansal, C. Cardie, and L. Lee, “The power of negative thinking:
Exploiting label disagreement in the min-cut classification framework,”
Proceedings of COLING: Companion volume: Posters, pp. 13–16, 2008.
[8] W. Lin and A. Hauptmann, “Are these documents written from different
perspectives?: a test of different perspectives based on statistical distribution divergence,” in Proc. of the 21st Int. Conf. on Computational
Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the ACL. ACL, 2006, pp.
1057–1064.
[9] M. Woodward, I. Rohmaniyah, A. Amin, and D. Coleman, “Muslim
education, celebrating islam and having fun as counter-radicalization
strategies in indonesia,” Perspectives on Terrorism, vol. 4, no. 4, 2010.
[10] S. Tikves, S. Banerjee, H. Temkit, S. Gokalp, H. Davulcu, A. Sen,
S. Corman, M. Woodward, I. Rochmaniyah, and A. Amin, “A system
for ranking organizations using social scale analysis,” in EISIC. IEEE,
2011, pp. 308–313.

[11] S. Tikves, S. Banerjee, H. Temkit, S. Gokalp, H. Davulcu, A. Sen,
S. Corman, M. Woodward, S. Nair, I. Rohmaniyah, and A. Amin, “A
system for ranking organizations using social scale analysis,” Social
Network Analysis and Mining (SNAM), Accepted for publication.
[12] J. Hartigan and M. Wong, “Algorithm as 136: A k-means clustering
algorithm,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied
Statistics), vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 100–108, 1979.
[13] G. Rasch, “On general laws and the meaning of measurement in
psychology,” in Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Psychology, 4, 1961, p. 332.
[14] R. Likert, “A technique for the measurement of attitudes,” Archives of
Psychology, vol. 140, pp. 1–55, 1932.
[15] L. L. Thurstone, “Attitudes can be measured,” American Journal of
Sociology, vol. 33, pp. 529–554, 1928.
[16] J. McIver and E. Carmines, Unidimensional Scaling. Sage Publications,
Inc, 1981, vol. 24.
[17] L. Guttman, “The basis for scalogram analysis,” Measurement and
prediction, vol. 4, pp. 60–90, 1950.
[18] D. Andrich, Rasch models for measurement. Sage, 1988.
[19] D. Hessen, “Likelihood ratio tests for special rasch models,” Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics, vol. 35, no. 6, p. 611, 2010.
[20] P. Mair and R. Hatzinger, “Extended rasch modeling: The erm package
for the application of irt models in r,” 2007.
[21] D. Drehmer, J. Belohlav, and R. Coye, “An exploration of employee
participation using a scaling approach,” Group & Organization Management, vol. 25, no. 4, p. 397, 2000.
[22] J. Liu, J. Chen, and J. Ye, “Large-scale sparse logistic regression,” in
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 2009, pp. 547–556.
[23] E. Durkheim, “The cultural logic of collective representations,” Social
theory the multicultural and classic readings, Wesleyan University:
Westview Press, 2004.
[24] G. Simmel, Sociological Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[25] A. Wallace, “Revitalization movements,” American Anthropologist,
vol. 58, pp. 264–281, 1956.
[26] C. Tilly, Social Movements. Boulder, CO, USA: Paradigm Publishers,
2004.
[27] A. Bayat, Making Islam Democratic: Social Movements and the PostIslamist Turn. Stanford University Press, 2007.

