The first ACM SIGSPATIAL PhD symposium 2014
The ACM SIGSPATIAL Ph.D. Symposium is a forum where Ph.D. students present, discuss, and receive feedback on their research in a constructive atmosphere. The symposium will be attended by professors, researchers and practitioners in the ACM SIGSPATIAL community, who will participate actively and contribute to the discussions. The workshop is co-located with ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2014 The ACM SIGSPATIAL 2014 PhD Symposium provides an opportunity for doctoral students to explore and develop their research interests in the broad areas addressed by the ACM SIGSPATIAL community. We invite PhD students to submit a summary of their dissertation work to share their work with students in a similar situation as well as senior researchers in the field. We have two tracks for submission. The Junior PhD Track is for students who are in early stages of their doctoral studies. The submission should provide a clear problem definition, explain why it is important, survey related work, and summarize the new solutions that are pursued. The Senior PhD Track is for students who are close to completion (expected to graduate by 2014/2015). The submissions focused on describing the contribution they made in their doctoral dissertation. The strongest candidates are those who have a clear topic and research approach, and have made some progress, but who are not so far along that they can no longer make changes.

Mobi Social (Mobile and Social) Data Management: A Tutorial
:
The rise of the Social Internet, in the past decade, stimulated the invention of human-centered technologies that study and serve humans as individuals and in groups. For instance, social networking services provide ways for individuals to connect and interact with their friends. Also, personalized recommender systems leverage the collaborative social intelligence of all users' opinions to recommend: books, news, movies, or products in general. These social technologies have been enhancing the quality of Internet services and enriching the end-user experience. Furthermore, the Mobile Internet allows hundreds of millions of users to frequently use their mobile devices to access their healthcare information and bank accounts, interact with friends, buy stuff online, search interesting places to visit on-the-go, ask for driving directions, and more. In consequence, everything we do on the Mob Social Internet leaves breadcrumbs of digital traces that, when managed and analyzed well, could definitely be leveraged to improve life. Services that leverage Mobile and/or Social data have become killer applications in the cloud. Nonetheless, a major challenge that Cloud Service providers face is how to manage (store, index, query) Mobi Social data hosted in the cloud. Unfortunately, classic data management systems are not well adapted to handle data-intensive Mobi Social applications. The tutorial surveys state-of-the-art Mobi Social data management systems and research prototypes from the following perspectives: (1) Geo-tagged Micro blog search, location-aware and mobile social news feed queries, and GeoSocial Graph search, (2) Mobile Recommendation Services, and (3) Geo-Crowd sourcing. We finally highlight the risks and threats (e.g., privacy) that result from combining mobility and social networking. We conclude the tutorial by summarizing and presenting open research directions.

RECATHON: A Middleware for Context-Aware Recommendation in Database Systems
:
This paper presents RECATHON, a context-aware recommender system built entirely inside a database system. Unlike traditional recommender systems that are context-free where they support the general query of Recommend movies for a certain user, RECATHON users can request recommendations based on their age, location, gender, or any other contextual/ demographical/preferential user attribute. A main challenge of supporting such kind of recommenders is the difficulty of deciding what attributes to build recommenders on. RECATHON addresses this challenge as it supports building recommenders in database systems in an analogous way to building index structures. Users can decide to create recommenders on selected attributes, e.g., Age and/or gender, and then entertain efficient support of multidimensional recommenders on the selected attributes. RECATHON employs a multi-dimensional index structure for each built recommender that can be accessed using novel query execution algorithms to support efficient retrieval for recommender queries. Experimental results based on an actual prototype of RECATHON, built inside Postgre SQL, using real Movie Lens and Foursquare data show that RECATHON exhibits real time performance for large-scale multidimensional recommendation.

Interactive and Scalable Exploration of Big Spatial Data - A Data Management Perspective
:
Recently, the volume of available spatial data increased tremendously. For instance, in November 2013 NASA announced the release of hundreds of Terabytes of its earth remote sensing dataset. Such data includes but not limited to: weather maps, socioeconomic data, vegetation indices, geological maps, and more. Making sense of such spatial data will be beneficial for several applications that may transform science and society -- For example: (1) Space Science: that allows astronomers to study and probably discover new features of both the earth and the outer space, (2) Socio-Economic Analysis: that includes for example climate change analysis, study of deforestation, population migration, and variation in sea levels, (3) Urban Planning: assisting government in city planning, road network design, and transportation engineering, (4) Disaster Planning: that helps in assessing the impact of natural disasters. The main aim of this paper is to investigate novel data management techniques that enable interactive and scalable exploration of big spatial data. The paper envisions novel system architectures that provide support for interactive and spatial data exploration, as follows: (1) The paper suggests extending data analytics frameworks, e.g., Apache Spark, to support spatial data types and operations at scale. The resulting framework will serve as a scalable backbone for processing spatial data exploration tasks. (2) It also sketches novel structures and algorithms that leverage modern hardware, e.g., SSDs, and in-memory data processing techniques to efficiently store and access spatial data. Second, the paper proposes extending spatial database systems to support an exploration-aware spatial query evaluation paradigm through three novel components: (1) Spatial Query Steering: that allows the user to slightly modify the query conditions online (zooming in/out) and retrieve the new results in very low latency. (2) Recommendation-Aware Spatial Querying: that injects the recommendation functionality inside classical spatial query executors to support spatial data recommendation. It leverages recommendation algorithms to predict what spatial objects/areas the user would like based on her past interactions with the system. (3) Spatial Query Approximation: That aims at achieving interactive performance by studying the tradeoff between approximate spatial data exploration and query response time.

Context Awareness in Mobile Systems
Context represents any information that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an application, including the user and application themselves. The ubiquity of mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, GPS devices) has in part motivated the use of contextual information in modern mobile applications. From one perspective, context in mobile systems can fall into three categories: (a) user context that includes the personal attributes of the user, e.g., spatial location and budget; (b) point-of-interest (POI) context, e.g., restaurant location, operating time, and rating; and (c) environmental context, e.g., weather and road conditions. Incorporating such context in applications provided to mobile users may significantly enhance the quality of service in terms of finding more related answers. This chapter first gives a brief overview of context and context awareness in mobile systems. It then discusses different ways of expressing the spatial location context within mobile services. The chapter later describes three main application examples that can take advantage of various mobile contexts, namely, social news feed, microblogging (e.g., Twitter) and recommendation services. The chapter finally presents a generic method that incorporates context and user preference awareness in database systems—which may serve as a backbone for context-aware mobile applications.


