220

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

A Low-Power Integrated x86–64 and Graphics
Processor for Mobile Computing Devices
Denis Foley, Member, IEEE, Pankaj Bansal, Member, IEEE, Don Cherepacha, Robert Wasmuth,
Aswin Gunasekar, Srinivasa Gutta, and Ajay Naini

Abstract—The first AMD Fusion™ accelerated processing unit
(APU), code-named “Zacate,” incorporates a pair of Bobcat x86
processors, a 1 MB L2 cache, an AMD Radeon™ 6310 DirectX®11
GPU with 80 stream processors, a media accelerator, an integrated
NorthBridge (NB), integrated DisplayPort, LVDS, and VGA display interfaces, a PCIe® Gen1 or Gen2 I/O interface, and a single
64-bit memory channel at up to DDR3-1066 on a single die implemented in a 40 nm bulk CMOS process.
Index Terms—AMD fusion, APU, Bobcat, integrated graphics,
low-power, Zacate.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE AMD Fusion™ accelerated processing unit (APU)
code-named Zacate is implemented in a 40 nm CMOS
bulk process. The design features the new synthesizable
low-power Bobcat x64–64 core and integrated AMD Radeon™
graphics. This paper shares details on the architecture, technology, functional units, justification for the AMD Fusion
approach, and details on power savings techniques, power
gating, and clocking. Some performance data is shared to
provide context for the power profile of the device. This paper
is divided into 13 sections including this introduction, technical
topics, performance, conclusion, and references.

T

II. ARCHITECTURE
The AMD Fusion APU code-named Zacate shown in Fig. 1
incorporates two low-power Bobcat x86 processors, each
with a dedicated 512 KB L2 cache, an AMD Radeon™ 6310
DirectX®11 graphics processing unit (GPU), and AMD’s
Universal Video Decoder (UVD) media acceleration engine.
Memory access to a single 64-bit DDR3-1066 memory channel
is controlled through an integrated NorthBridge (NB). Zacate
supports a four-lane PCIe interface to the AMD Fusion Controller Hub (FCH) and a four-lane PCIe interface to an external
GPU if desired. The PCIe links are capable of running at either
2.5 Gb/s Gen1 rate or 5 Gb/s Gen2 rate, and are capable of
Manuscript received April 26, 2011; revised June 22, 2011; accepted July 05,
2011. Date of publication October 19, 2011; date of current version December
23, 2011. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Alice Wang.
D. Foley is with Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), Inc., Boxborough, MA
01719 USA (e-mail: denis.foley@amd.com).
P. Bansal, S. Gutta, and A. Naini are with Advanced Micro Devices (AMD),
Hyderabad 500034 A.P., India.
D. Cherepacha is with Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), Oakville, Markham,
ON, Canada L6H 6T5.
R. Wasmuth and A. Gunasekar are with Advanced Micro Devices (AMD),
Austin, TX 78735 USA.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2011.2167776

switching between modes depending on the current allowed
power state. Two unique display output streams can be presented over any two of the following: 1) a DisplayPort (DP1.1a)
interface; 2) a combination low-voltage differential signaling
(LVDS)/DP1.1a port; or 3) an integrated video graphics array
(VGA) DAC. A digital frequency synthesizer (DFS) block
supplies the CPU core, graphics, multi-media, display, I/O, and
NB clocks.
The AMD Fusion architecture implements a very efficient
form of unified memory architecture (UMA) in which a portion
of system memory is reserved as graphics frame buffer memory.
The graphics memory controller (GMC) arbitrates between
graphics, video, and display memory requests and presents a
well-ordered stream of system memory transactions through
the NB over dedicated 256-bit-wide read and write busses.
These GMC requests bypass all NB coherency mechanisms,
allowing for fast direct access to memory and exposing all of
the available memory bandwidth (8.53 GB/s).
III. TECHNOLOGY
Zacate is implemented in a 40 nm bulk CMOS process. Ten
metal layers are used, the top two of which are redistribution
layer (RDL). The die area is 75 mm . Each Bobcat core is
4.9 mm , and each L2 is 3.1 mm . Each core has approximately
7 nF of on-die capacitance. Excluding PHYs, the graphics, I/O,
and multi-media blocks occupy 35 mm . There is approximately
60 nF of on-die capacitance associated with this logic. The die
is packaged in a 19 mm 19 mm ball-grid array (BGA) package
with 413 0.8 mm balls. The package substrate is a 2-2-2 layup.
10 nF of VDDNB package capacitance and 3.3 F of VDD capacitance are supported. Fig. 2 shows a Zacate die photograph
with functional units labeled.
IV. BOBCAT CORE
The Bobcat core shown in Fig. 3 is a brand-new x86 design
making its debut in Zacate. The core features a decoder capable
of decoding two complex operations (COPs) per cycle. It supports the AMD64 64-bit ISA. The execution engine supports
full out-of-order (OoO) execution, and the load/store engine can
execute loads and stores out of order. The design features a
high-performance floating-point unit and an advanced branch
predictor. Streaming SIMD extensions including SSE1, SSE2,
SSE3, SSSE3, SSE4A, and 128-bit mis-aligned data-type extensions are also supported. The design features 32 KB L1 caches
and a dedicated 512 KB L2 cache. The design runs at 1.6 GHz,
with the L2 running at half that rate. Bobcat supports core power
gating.

0018-9200/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

221

Fig. 1. Zacate block diagram.

Fig. 2. Zacate die shot with labeled functional units.

V. GRAPHICS AND MULTI-MEDIA
Zacate contains a small, power-efficient AMD Radeon™ HD
6310 GPU that is sized to take full advantage of the 8.53 GB/s
of memory bandwidth provided by the 64-bit channel of DDR31066 memory. The GPU comprises graphics, video, audio, and
display capabilities similar to a discrete graphics card. The APU
uses a UMA in which the GPU’s frame buffer is implemented

Fig. 3. Bobcat low-power core.

by reserving a section of system memory. Typical memory allocation for the frame buffer is 384 MB. Additional GPU memory
can be allocated dynamically from system memory.

222

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

TABLE I
BLU-RAY PLAYBACK

The DirectX 11-compliant graphics core contains 80 stream
processing units, eight texture units, 16 Z/Stencil ROP units, and
four color ROP units. The computational units are organized as
a 2-SIMD x 8 array of vector processors in which each vector
processor consists of five stream processing units. The unified
shader architecture allows a flexible set of programs to be executed. At 492 MHz, the core’s peak rate of 78.7 GFLOPs provides sufficient compute capability for gaming or compute applications enabled by DirectCompute and OpenCL.
Utilizing the AMD’s latest video decoder, UVD3, Zacate
provides uncompromised HD video playback, including many
advanced video quality processing algorithms. UVD3 provides
hardware acceleration for decode of H.264, VC-1, MPEG-2,
and DivX/Xvid video streams. This facilitates low-power
1080p/1080i video Blu-ray playback. Table I shows measured
CPU utilization when playing the Avatar Blu-ray disc (BD)
with UVD acceleration enabled and disabled. Without acceleration, the CPU cores are fully utilized and unable to play the
video without dropping video frames. With UVD acceleration,
the CPU load is reduced to approximately 31%, facilitating
a smooth video experience. The UVD also offloads from the
CPU the decode of a variety of on-line video content, including
Adobe® Flash® video.
Zacate provides two independent display interfaces that can
natively support VGA, LVDS, and DisplayPort. HDMI and DVI
can be supported with additional system-level components.
High-definition audio is supported, including Dolby® TrueHD
and DTS®-HD Master Audio.
The GIO block, shown in Fig. 1, performs system connectivity functions to route host and DMA traffic between the CPU
cores, system memory, internal devices, and external devices.
It contains a root complex supporting two four-lane PCIe Gen1
or Gen2 links. One link serves as the unified media interface
(UMI) to the FCH. The second link supports discrete graphics
attachments.

Fig. 4. AMD fusion advantage.

VI. FUSION BASICS
The traditional model of a processor chip (with integrated
NB) coupled with an integrated graphics processor has a number
of shortfalls. The high-speed PHY coupling the two processors
(shown in red in Fig. 4) occupies significant area and consumes
power. The power associated with the PHY can exceed 1 W
during media playback. Additionally, the link may present a
bandwidth bottleneck. When the two dies are integrated, a wide
(256 bits in each direction) data path from the graphics memory
controller to the NB is added, allowing for full access to system
memory from the GMC. This path provides GMC clients with

Fig. 5. Bobcat floorplan.

a low latency path to non-snooped regions of system memory,
reducing the minimum read latency by up to 40%. Compared

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

223

Fig. 7. Routing allocation in channel for Sub-chips.

Fig. 6. Sub-chip1 and Sub-chip2 partitioning.

to two-chip solutions, use of the on-die integrated GPU significantly reduces memory latency, improves request ordering, and
reduces area and power.
VII. IMPLEMENTATION
The AMD Fusion APU—including the x86 Bobcat cores—is
synthesized from RTL and implemented using standard
ASIC-style synthesis auto-place and route (SAPR) flows. The
die shown in Fig. 2 has more than 450 million transistors.
The Bobcat core is implemented as a single physical entity
consisting of 1.1 million instances and uses 35 instances of
seven custom memory macros. The GPU core logical RTL is
partitioned into multiple physical entities with varying numbers of standard cell instances and memory macros generated
using standard memory compilers. The GPU sub-chip uses
feed-through repeater bundles to connect the interfaces between
different physical entities and has minimal grout space at the
boundaries.
The Bobcat floorplan shown in Fig. 5 shows the various subblocks in the core as placement regions. L2 sub-array, tag array,

and caches occupy most of the top and bottom of the floorplan,
while the bus unit and floating-point unit are placement regions
placed using various placement optimization techniques. The
typical amoeba placement for various other sub-blocks in the
floorplan shows the placement as achieved through careful floorplanning and tool optimization.
The SOC was implemented in two sub-chips, and a two-level
hierarchical floorplanning and partitioning approach was used.
Sub-chip1 consisted of the Bobcat core cluster, NB, and
all I/O PHYs. Sub-chip2 consisted of the graphics core and
multi-media and I/O control, collectively referred to as the
GNB (Fig. 6).
Sub-chip1 and Sub-chip2 were further floorplanned to create
an overlay channel between the Bobcat cores and DDR PHY
through GNB sub-chip. Thus GNB Sub-chip2 could be independently designed and integrated with Sub-chip1 in SOC without
causing any routing and integration issues. As shown in Fig. 7,
specific metal layers were allocated to Sub-chip1 and Sub-chip2
for their respective signal interactions in horizontal and vertical
directions.
The CPU and GPU core operate on separate voltage supplies
and support dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) to
optimize power consumption. The design is optimized for power
and performance at discrete process and voltage points. The
CPU is optimized for power and performance at 1.2 V and 0.8
V. Timing optimization at high voltage secures the performance
of the CPU, while timing at low voltage secures the minimum

224

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 8. Frequency vs. voltage for a representative GFX (SVT) path.

Fig. 10. Transistor threshold voltage mix.

Fig. 9. SOC statistics.

operating frequency and ensures that the best performance/watt
is provided at the low frequency. The GPU is optimized at 1.0
V, 0.9 V, and 0.8 V. Incremental functionality or feature sets can
be enabled at progressively higher voltages. The GPU design is
closed at multiple points to ensure that the incremental capability is matched across the design elements and is optimized
for performance/watt at all operating points. Fig. 8 shows how
frequency of a representative GPU path—a mix of device and
wire delays using SVT devices—varies with device voltage.
Standard cell logic transistors comprise 2/3 of the total 451
million transistors, while memories and macros cover the remaining 1/3. The dual Bobcat core and L2 account for 12 Mb
of the 23 Mb on-chip memory.
Extensive powers saving techniques were used, including VT
swapping across the GPU design and the Bobcat core. The design has transistors fabricated in various threshold voltages and
lengths to facilitate performance/leakage trade-offs. At 105 ,
LVT devices are approximately 4x leakier than SVT devices,
which are in turn approximately 3.5x leakier than HVT devices.
As shown in Fig. 10, approximately 56% of the logic transistors
are HVT, and approximately 42% are SVT. To limit leakage
power, less than 2% are LVT devices, and those are used only
in critical paths. The VT distribution contains the regular-and
different-length variants for the same VT devices to further reduce power leakage without compromising performance/area.

Fig. 11. DFS clock generation.

VIII. CLOCKING
The design has 16 functional, 10 scan, and 11 debug mode
clocks. A digital frequency synthesizer (DFS) is used to generate nine functional clocks used by the CPUs, NB, and GPU
(Fig. 11). The system PLL provides four phase-offset references
to the DFS, which combines the phases to generate the required
clock frequencies.
As shown in Fig. 12, ClkEn_A[3:0] is a 4-bit phase-enable
value that is presented to the DFS every VCO period. Each of
the bits corresponds to one of the VCO output phases. If a phase
is enabled in a particular VCO period (shaded in blue in Fig. 12),
that phase is combined with other enabled phases to generate the
output clock. By controlling a repeating phase-enable sequence,
different clock frequencies can be generated easily. Because the

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

225

Fig. 12. Generating clocks using DFS.

Fig. 13. Clock delivery.

phase-enable sequence can be changed at any time, clock generation is not interrupted on frequency transitions. This clock
generation mechanism builds on a similar mechanism used in
AMD Turion™ processors, but adds more VCO phases for finer
frequency control.
The high-speed CPU clock is distributed as a mesh network
with six to eight levels of local buffers. The GPU clock (SCLK)
is implemented with X-tree and H-tree topologies feeding into
the clock tree synthesis (CTS) branches inside a physical tile.
All other clocks are implemented as balanced buffer trees from
DFS to the physical tile. The NB and GPU clocks are balanced
globally with respect to each other within a half-cycle of the
fastest clock using programmable delay buffers pre-placed beside the global trees.
With such an implementation, Zacate achieves a global skew
of 38 ps and 50 ps in CPU and GPU clock distribution,
respectively. Fig. 13 shows the two distinctive clock tree structures as deployed for top-level clock distribution in the two
sub-chips. A 5% clock jitter target was used for the synthesized clocks.

Fig. 14. Zacate power domains.

IX. DESIGN FOR POWER
Zacate’s various power domains are shown in Fig. 14. Each
Bobcat core and its L2 cache together share a power island
(Fig. 15). A single variable VDD rail supplies both core power
islands. Core clocks can be varied independently and VDD
(CPU voltage) is selected to be the lowest voltage required to
support the highest of the selected core clocks. Bobcat supports
Core C6 (CC6) power state. If the core is idle, its caches can be
flushed, its state saved to memory, and power to the core island
is gated off. If both cores are idle and power-gated, the VDD

226

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 17. VDDNB global power grid implementation.

Fig. 15. Bobcat power gating.

Fig. 16. VDDNB power gating.

power rail can be further reduced to eliminate leakage in even
the power-gating structures. This state is called Package C6
(PC6). In PC6, voltage can be lowered to 0 V, but with frequent
entry/exit to PC6, VDD is typically set at 0.45 V to minimize
voltage ramp time and energy wasted in charging/discharging
motherboard capacitance.
GPU and the NB share a variable VDDNB rail as shown in
Fig. 16. GPU and NB clocks are varied independently based on
activity. VDDNB is selected based on the highest voltage requested. The GPU supports several power islands, allowing for
driver-controlled power gating of the UVD video acceleration
engine and independent dynamic power gating of the GFX core
and the GMC. The display controller supports a static-screen
refresh-stutter mode in which the controller requests data periodically from memory; between requests, the memory is kept in
self-refresh and the NB enters a low-power state. By stuttering
the display requests to memory, the time spent in self-refresh
for the memory can be maximized, the time that clocks are running in the NB can be minimized and startup penalties (PLL
power on and lock, DLL lock time) can be amortized over a
larger memory transfer. Typical stutter efficiency (time spent in
self-refresh during static screen rendering) is greater than 94%.
APU MM07 power varies by approximately 130 mW for every
10% change in stutter efficiency.
The combination of power savings techniques yields an APU
with an average MobileMark® (MM07) power consumption of
less than 1.8 W.
X. POWER GATING IMPLEMENTATION
On-die power gating is implemented using a leakage-optimized HVT PFET header switch to isolate the VDD (or
VDDNB) supplies. The header uses parallel stacked PFET
transistors with separate enables for each PFET. This is in
contrast to other x86 designs [1], [2] in which VSS isolation is

used. The Bobcat core uses a dense grid implemented in M9
and M10 to satisfy the high current density in the core and to
reduce IR drop impact on frequency. The total PFET width for
a core and its L2 is about 1.0 m. The corresponding number of
power-gating PFETs is approximately 30,000.
VDDNB power grid is implemented in M7 and M8 with
power-gater PFETs placed on a checkerboard pattern (Fig. 17).
Power gating for compiled memories is arranged at the top and
bottom of the memory to avoid interference with the memory
arrays. Tall memories implement a double row of PFETs at the
top and bottom, while shorter memories implement a single
row at the top and bottom. This is illustrated in Fig. 18, which
is a close-up of a GPU tile showing the checkerboard pattern
for logic and the single or double rows of PFETs for compiled
memories.
Each PFET header, as shown in Fig. 19, is made from two
FETS with separate enables. A smaller WAKE FET is used to
initiate current flow into the grid on enable. The controls for
the WAKE FETs are daisy-chained with a return path to the
power controller. Once the WAKE FETs have been enabled,
large RUN FETs can be turned on to provide a robust low-onresistance connection to the power grid. The controls for the
RUN FETs are similarly daisy-chained; once all the RUN FETs
have been enabled, the power to the gated region is completely
restored. This WAKE/RUN sequence is critical to avoid in-rush
current spikes as the grid is enabled. The WAKE/RUN timing is
programmable, allowing for post-silicon tuning of the delays in
enabling the grid.
The VDDNB grid is designed to drive a current density of
0.5 A/mm and achieve a 2% static IR drop. The total gate
width of GPU headers is 1.93 m and resistance is 0.6 m .
Fig. 20 shows the simulated voltage drop distribution across
PFET headers used in the design. The switches were uniformly
distributed in the design through pre-placement, and the voltage
drop varies across switches depending on density and logic in
the region.
Fig. 21 shows four photon-emission captures of the Zacate
die. All these captures are on a tester with clocks disabled, so the
current flow is purely leakage. Capture duration was 30 seconds.
1.225 V and VDDNB
Captures 1, 2, and 3 have VDD
0.875 V; capture 4 has VDD 0.875 V, and VDDNB 0.875 V.
In capture 1, all functional units are enabled. In capture 2, CPU0
is power-gated off. In capture 3, CPU1 is gated off. In capture
4, all power-gated areas are off. The effect of power gating is
immediately obvious. Capture 4 also highlights areas that are
not gated off – the always on (AON) blocks. The small active
area adjacent to the gated core in capture 2 and capture 3 is

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

Fig. 18. Header distribution in typical GPU tile.

Fig. 20. Voltage across VDDNB PFETs.

Fig. 19. WAKE/RUN power gater control.

interface logic between the core and the NB channel that was
not power-gated.
XI. BOBCAT FLOP
Two flop types were used in the CPU core: a conventional
master-slave flop, and a Bobcat flop (BT flop) shown in
Fig. 22—a three-stage, pre-charged, asymmetric, MUXD flop.
The BT flop is much faster than the master-slave flop, but is also
bigger. The BT flop was used only on critical paths, thereby
realizing its speed advantages while increasing the core area
only a small amount.

Fig. 21. Meridian photon-emission power-gating analysis.

227

228

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 22. Bobcat high-speed flop.

TABLE II
IMPACT ON AREA AND FREQUENCY OF BT FLOP

The BT flop operates similarly to a sense amp flop [3]. While
clock is low, both NFET stacks of Stage 1 are pre-charged.
is
The half tri-state of Stage 2 is, therefore, disabled, and
determined by the active latch of Stage 3. When clock rises,
Stage 1 is evaluated, Stage 2 is enabled, and Stage 3 feedback
is disabled.
The BT flop is faster than a sense amp flop for two reasons:
stack order in Stage 1, and size skewing afforded by asymmetry of the transitions. In Stage 1, cross-coupled NFETs are at
the bottom of the stack, and pre-discharged when clock is low.
Last-arriving data is at the top of stack. Regarding the second
advantage, the BT flop is nominally three gate delays if the left
NFET stack of Stage 1 discharges, but only two gate delays if
the right stack discharges. This is exploited in the beta ratios
of each stage so rising and falling transitions have nearly equal
clock-to- delays.
A majority of critical timing paths in processor designs are
limited by slow setup, clock-to- , or rising/falling edge, but not
all of them simultaneously. A few experiments validated the hypothesis that SAPR tools could take advantage of flops designed
to be the best in any given performance metric.
A flop library development effort focused on using such a flop
as the base style and building specialist variants of the same to
maximize frequency. A close review of the top critical paths revealed important criteria such as output edge rate, fast rising/
fast falling, clock cycle extension, or clock pin buffering/unbuffering to favor fast clock-to- or setup, or slow buffer to

TABLE III
GPU CAPABILITIES

further favor setup. Other criteria included increasing the range
of drive strengths and adding combinational functions such as
NAND and NOR. The resultant library contained about 100
flop variants to optimize for the various combinations of these
features.
Performance is summarized in Table II. BT flops have longer
hold time and higher dynamic power than master-slave flops, but
when their usage was limited to only critical paths, frequency
improvement for the CPU core was 7%.
XII. PERFORMANCE
Bobcat is an AMD64 86 ISA core targeting low-cost/area
and high power efficiency while maintaining comparable singlethread performance to mainstream client processors such as the

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

229

TABLE IV
ZACATE GPU PERFORMANCE RELATIVE TO RADEON 4270

1.6 GHz AMD Turion Neo X2 L625, derived from the first-generation AMD Opteron™ core [4]. Although many applications
are now multi-threaded and can take advantage of higher performance of Zacate’s two cores, numerous user-sensitive operations are dependent on the performance of a single thread.
Central to Bobcat providing high single-thread performance
was the choice of OoO execution with a two-wide decode/retire scheme. The fully OoO design with deep speculation enables energy saving by keeping the pipeline filled while reducing dynamic and static energy spent on stalled cycles as
well as significantly increasing IPC relative to in-order designs
used in other contemporary small cores. To reduce power, several micro-architectural approaches were used, including minimizing over-provisioning [5], reducing mis-speculation, and
minimizing data transfers and data structure accesses. The twowide design, relative to the three-wide design in the comparison machine, minimized over-provisioning in terms of execution units, register file ports, etc., but with some loss of performance, some of which was recovered through other optimizations. To reduce mis-speculation and improve performance, a
sophisticated branch prediction structure was developed that utilized 32 k two-way L1 instruction cache with a return stack
and indirect dynamic and advanced conditional branch predictors with a high-capacity 512/8 entry (4 k/2 m pages) instruction translation buffer (I-TLB). A physical register file is used
both by the integer and floating-point units to reduce data transfers. The floating-point unit (FP) has a two execution stacks capable of two single-precision (SP) single-instruction/multipledata (SIMD) adds and two SP SIMD multiplies per cycle. The
load-store unit (LS) is fully OoO with a hazard predictor to minimize mis-speculations, a 32 k eight-way data cache with a 40/8
entry (4 k/2 m) and a 512/64(4 k/2 m) entry Level 2 data translation buffer (L2DTLB), and an eight-stream data pre-fetcher.
The instruction and data cache share an ECC-protected 16-way
512 KB per-core private L2 cache, clocked at half the core rate
to reduce power.
Fig. 23 illustrates single-thread performance comparable
( 0.9x) to the AMD Turion L625 based on SPECint2006 [6].
This is achieved in less than half the process scaled area and
dynamic power of the AMD Turion L625 core. SPECint2006
is a benchmark that includes a broad range of compute-in-

Fig. 23. Bobcat performance relative to AMD turion L625.

tensive integer applications that stress different aspects of the
processor, from branch prediction to the cache hierarchy.
Table III specifies the basic performance metrics for the
graphics core. The low-latency, high-bandwidth GMC memory
interface increases performance per watt by allowing a higher
percentage of the power to be used for computation rather
than for moving large amounts of data across high-power
chip-to-chip interconnects. For example, the power consumed
by the HyperTransport™ link between the CPU and the AMD
880 G chipset was more than 1 W during periods of high GPU
memory activity. With the AMD Fusion architecture, most of
this interconnect power is saved.
The advanced, multi-level memory arbitration units resolve
performance issues with previous integrated graphics processors (IGP) by enabling the GPU to achieve memory efficiency
similar to a discrete GPU without compromising CPU performance. GPU memory accesses are sent in DRAM efficient
streams of reads and writes to avoid memory access penalties
while CPU accesses are optimized for low read latency. These
improvements yield a 17% increase in Zacate UMA memory
efficiency compared to its two-chip predecessor.1
Table IV illustrates the gaming capabilities of Zacate using
the industry-standard 3DMark® benchmarks. The low-cost,
1Memory efficiency was measured using the Win7 Experience Index (WEI)
graphics memory benchmark using system populated with one 64-bit DDR31066 SODIMM.

230

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

TABLE V
3D GAME PERFORMANCE

power-efficient Zacate APU outperforms the mainstream mobile AMD Radeon™ 4270 M GPU in the AMD 880 G chipset.
In 3DMark Vantage – Performance, Zacate is 2.26 times faster.
Table V shows benchmarking results using several popular
games.
In addition to providing computational resources for 3D
graphics operations, the 80 stream processing units may also
be used to speed up many general-purpose floating-point-intensive applications. The OpenCL implementation of the
floating-point-intensive Mandelbrot set generator in SiSoftware Sandra 2011 multi-media benchmark [7] illustrates this
capability, yielding a 5x improvement in performance of
the benchmark running on the GPU versus a multi-threaded,
SIMD-vectorized implementation on the CPU cores. This result
is consistent with the GPU-to-CPU peak FLOPS ratio of 6 to 1
(78.7 GFLOPs versus 12.8 GFLOPs).

XIII. CONCLUSION
The AMD Fusion Zacate APU brings together x86 processors, NB, I/O, multi-media acceleration, and compelling
graphics processing capability on a single die. Using the
low-power techniques described in this document, the part
provides an excellent balance of performance and long battery
life.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Jotwani et al., “An x86–64 core implemented in 32 nm SOI CMOS,”
in 2010 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers,
Feb. 7–11, 2010, pp. 106–107.
[2] T. Fischer et al., “Design solutions for the bulldozer 32 nm SOI 2-core
processor module in an 8-core CPU,” in 2011 IEEE Int. Solid-State
Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2011, pp. 78–79.
[3] J. Montanaro et al., “A 160-MHz, 32-b, 0.5-W CMOS RISC microprocessor,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1703–1714,
Nov. 1996.
[4] C. N. Keltcher, K. J. McGrath, A. Ahmed, and P. Conway, “The AMD
Opteron processor for multiprocessor servers,” IEEE Micro, vol. 23,
no. 2, pp. 66–76, Mar.-Apr. 2003.
[5] K. Natarajan, H. Hanson, S. W. Keckler, C. R. Moore, and D. Burger,
“Microprocessor pipeline energy analysis,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int.
Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), Aug. 25–27,
2003, pp. 282–287, Session 12.
[6] SPEC CPU 2006 Benchmark Suite, Standard Performance Evaluation
Corp. (SPEC). [Online]. Available: http://www.spec.org/benchmarks.
html, Reported results are estimated because measurements were made
on pre-production hardware.
[7] SiSoftware: Sandra 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.sisoftware.
net/

Denis Foley (M’06) received the B.Eng.(Elect.) degree from University College Cork, Ireland, in 1983.
He is a Senior Fellow at Advanced Micro Devices,
Inc. He has more than 28 years of experience in
the computing industry. At Digital Equipment and
Compaq, he was a design lead in the Alpha server
group. At Hewlett-Packard, he was the implementation lead for a high-end Itanium server. At ATI,
he was the chip lead for a game console cost-down
before turning his attention to low-power design, first
as the system architect for a licensable 3D GPU core,
then as the system architect for ATI’s Imageon family of application processors
for hand-held devices. With AMD’s acquisition of ATI, he moved into the
SOC architect role for a number of AMD’s low-power designs, including the
recently announced AMD Fusion Zacate and Ontario APUs.

Pankaj Bansal (M’11) received the B.Tech. (E.E.)
degree from the Indian Institute of Technology,
Delhi, India, in 1997.
Since then, he has worked on various domains
in microarchitecture, logic design, verification, and
physical/circuit design/analysis at companies such
as Intel, Freescale, Centillium, and Beceem. Prior to
joining AMD in 2009, he was SOC lead/manager for
3G baseband ICs at Freescale. Since joining AMD in
2009, he has been responsible for multiple discrete
GPU parts. Most recently, he has been leading design
of the low-power AMD Fusion APUs from AMD’s India Design Center.

Don Cherepacha received B.A.Sc. and M.A.Sc. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada, in 1991 and 1994, respectively.
He is currently a Fellow at AMD in Markham,
Ontario, and has more than 18 years of ASIC
architecture, design, and verification experience. He
joined LSI Logic in 1993 to work on PC and server
chipsets as well as PCI and USB core development.
He moved to Cogency Semiconductor, Inc. in 1998,
where he led the ASIC architecture and development of that company’s first HomePlug powerline
networking ICs. He then joined ATI/AMD in 2004 and has worked in the areas
of IGP/AMD Fusion architecture and performance for a range of chipsets and
APUs.

Robert Wasmuth received the B.S.E.E. degree from
the University of Texas at Austin in 1984.
He then joined IBM working on logic synthesis,
circuit design tools, and performance modeling for
the POWER series of microprocessors. He did performance analysis and modeling for various designs,
including a network processor, a web-based transaction system, and a VOIP switch at different start-ups
in Austin. After joining AMD in 2002, he has been
involved in various aspects of x86 design, most recently leading the performance and power modeling
team for the Bobcat core and SOC.

FOLEY et al.: A LOW-POWER INTEGRATED x86–64 AND GRAPHICS PROCESSOR FOR MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES

Aswin Gunasekar received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Madras,
India, in 2001, and the M.S. degree in computer
engineering from the University of Texas, Austin, in
2003.
He joined AMD in 2004, and has worked in a
variety of design roles that include I/Os, SRAMs,
and high-performance standard cell libraries. He
currently leads design methodology for a low-power
family of microprocessors. He has four pending
patents on processor circuits.

Srinivasa Gutta received the B.E. (Electronics and
Communication) degree from Osmania University,
Hyderabad, India, and the M.S.E.E. from the University of Texas at San Antonio.
He has 18 years of experience in SOC design,
verification, and architecture. He started his career
at CommQuest Technologies (acquired by IBM)
designing voice coder DSPs for GSM baseband
chips. He then joined Lucent/Agere Systems and
spent 13 years working as SOC lead/architect on
various communication chips, including the world’s
first PCI modem, K56Flex modem, and ADSL-Lite modems for client and
central office. He also worked as lead engineer on second- and third-generation
Sirius satellite radio chipset and mobile application processors in the Agere
Mobility division. At AMD, he led the design of the Imageon audio processor
and AMD Fusion Zacate/Ontario APU from AMD’s India Design Center.

231

Ajay Naini received the M.S. degree from Mississippi State University.
He is a Senior Director at AMD. He has 25 years
of CPU design experience and worked at Motorola,
Cyrix, and HaL Computer Systems in various capacities before joining AMD 10 years ago. He was one
of the lead engineers on the K8 processor family design at AMD, which delivered the first 64-bit x86 microprocessor and the first dual-core processor. Most
recently, he was the Project Director for the AMD
Fusion Zacate/Ontario design. He has more than 10
patents and several publications in floating-point and microprocessor design.

