Data Driven Game Theoretic Cyber Threat Mitigation

Penetration testing is regarded as the gold-standard for understanding how well an organization can withstand sophisticated cyber-attacks. However, the recent prevalence of markets specializing in zero-day exploits on the darknet make exploits widely available to potential attackers. The cost associated with these sophisticated kits generally precludes penetration testers from simply obtaining such exploits ᑛ so an alternative approach is needed to understand what exploits an attacker will most likely purchase and how to defend against them. In this paper, we introduce a data-driven security game framework to model an attacker and provide policy recommendations to the defender. In addition to providing a formal framework and algorithms to develop strategies, we present experimental results from applying our framework, for various system configurations, on real-world exploit market data actively mined from the dark-net.

Modeling cyber-attacks on industrial control systems
:
Despite the prevalence of markets for malware and exploits and their potential threat to industrial control systems (ICS), existing paradigms for modeling of such cyber-adversarial behavior do not account for the complex nature of ICS systems consisting of multiple interconnected components. This paper takes the first steps toward addressing this need. Here, we introduce a framework that allows for modeling of ICS systems with highly interconnected components and study this model through the lens of lattice theory. We then turn our attention to the problem of determining the optimal/most dangerous for a cyber-adversary with respect to this model and find it to be an NP-Complete problem. To address this complexity, we utilize an A*-based approach and develop admissible heuristics. We provide an implementation and show through a suite of experiments using both simulated and actual vulnerability data that this method performs well in practice for identifying adversarial courses of action in this domain.

Exploring Malicious Hacker Forums
For consumers the increasingly widespread consumer-grade connected (“smart”) devices; growing use of cloud-storage and globally still expanding use of Internet and mobile phones; mobile payment options will pose increasing risk of becoming a victim of cyber-attack. For companies and institutions of all kinds, matters regarding the protection of Intellectual Property (IP) and Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from cyber-breaches and -leaks will demand higher financial investment. With the discovery of Stuxnet, offensive and defensive cyber-capabilities have already become an acknowledged tool in military arsenals worldwide and are at the cusp of shifting the global landscape of military power. With the expanding yield of cyber-related activities, understanding the actors creating, manipulating, and distributing malicious code becomes a paramount task. In this chapter we report on the results of an exploration of black hat hacker forums on both the Internet and crypto-networks (in particular those accessed via the Tor-browser). We report on the structure, content, and standards of behavior within these forums. Throughout we highlight how these activity augment the activities of the black hat hackers who participate.

