Towards Addressing the Winograd Schema Challenge - Building and Using a
Semantic Parser and a Knowledge Hunting Module
Arpit Sharma, Nguyen H. Vo, Somak Aditya & Chitta Baral
School of Computing, Informatics & Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{asharm73, nhvo1, saditya1, chitta}@asu.edu
Abstract
Concerned about the Turing test’s ability to correctly evaluate if a system exhibits human-like intelligence, the Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC)
has been proposed as an alternative. A Winograd
Schema consists of a sentence and a question. The
answers to the questions are intuitive for humans
but are designed to be difficult for machines, as
they require various forms of commonsense knowledge about the sentence. In this paper we demonstrate our progress towards addressing the WSC.
We present an approach that identifies the knowledge needed to answer a challenge question, hunts
down that knowledge from text repositories, and
then reasons with them to come up with the answer. In the process we develop a semantic parser
(www.kparser.org). We show that our approach
works well with respect to a subset of Winograd
schemas.

1

Introduction

With significant advances and success in many Artificial Intelligence subfields, and instances of gaming the Turing test,
there is now a need to more clearly define how to evaluate when a system is replicating humanoid intelligence. The
Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) [Levesque et al., 2011]
is one such attempt. The WSC corpus consists of a set of
pairs of a sentence and a question such that the answer to the
question is about resolving a definite pronoun or possessive
adjective to one of its two probable co-referents in the sentence. The co-referents belong to same gender and they have
a number agreement between them (both are either singular
or plural). These make it harder to resolve the pronoun to
its antecedent. The sentence also contains a “special word”
which when replaced by another word (alternate word), the
answer to the question also changes. An example of such a
pair of Winograd Schema sentences is as follows.
Sentence: The man couldn’t lift his son because he was so
heavy. Question: Who was heavy ? Answer: son
Sentence: The man couldn’t lift his son because he was so
weak. Question: Who was weak ? Answer: man
The motivation behind this challenge is to evaluate humanlike reasoning in machines. For example, one of the many

ways in which humans answer the first sentence above is
by using the commonsense that “someone who could not be
lifted may be heavy”. Thus a human-like intelligent system that can answer such questions correctly needs to have
this knowledge and the ability to reason with that knowledge. Very recently, this aspect of human-like intelligence
has also been emphasized in several other (besides the Winograd challenge) research initiatives such as the call by Paul
G. Allen Family Foundation, and the Big Mechanism call
of DARPA. Since the existing knowledge repositories (such
as CYC, ConceptNet, and AURA) are not comprehensive
enough, and a comprehensive knowledge base may be too
unwieldy, we propose the following approach to address this
aspect of human-like intelligence: 1. determining what kind
of (commonsense) knowledge is needed; 2. finding a way to
acquire that knowledge [Knowledge Hunting]; and 3. reasoning with that knowledge [Reasoning].
In this paper we make a start with respect to WSC and illustrate our approach with respect to a subset of it. In particular, we identify two specific categories of WSC schemas and
focus on those. In the process we develop several needed
tools, such as a non domain-specific semantic parser (KParser, demo available at www.kparser.org), a Knowledge
Hunting module that is able to automatically extract knowledge needed for the two categories of WSC schemas that we
focus on, and a reasoning module that reasons with the KParser output. The semantic parser integrates various natural
language processing aspects, and incorporate ontologies and
knowledge. It is of independent interest, but here we only describe it to the extent used in this paper. We illustrate a simple graph based reasoning engine to answer the WSC schema
questions by using the semantic representation of both the input text and the automatically extracted knowledge.

2

The Corpus

The WSC corpus consists of 282 sentence and question pairs.
We evaluated our technique on a subset of the WSC corpus. The subset consists of a significant number of Winograd schemas that require two specific kind of commonsense
knowledge as mentioned below:
• Direct Causal Events - Event-event causality: In this category, the commonsense knowledge required has two mutually causal events (explained and convince in the example below) such that a pronoun participates in one of the event and

its candidate co-referent participates in another. For example,
for the text “Sid explained his theory to Mark but he could not
convince him .” and the question “Who could not convince ?”,
the expected answer is “Sid”. One way in which humans resolve he to Sid is by using the commonsense knowledge: IF
(X explained S to Y but Z could not convince) THEN (Z=X
i.e. agent of explained=agent of could not convince).
• Causal Attributive: In this category, the commonsense
knowledge required has an event and a participant entity in
that event has an associated attribute that is causally related
to the event. For example, for the text “Pete envies Martin
because he is very successful.” and the question “Who is
successful ?”, the expected answer is “Martin”. A kind of
commonsense knowledge required to get this answer is of the
form: X envies Y possibly because Y has trait successful.
Here Y is the participant entity and envies is the event in the
sentence.
A total of 711 WSC corpus sentences are categorized in the
above mentioned categories. The remaining 211 sentences2
do not fall into these categories because the kind of commonsense knowledge mentioned above is not enough to solve
them. For example, for the sentence “There is a pillar between me and the stage, and I can not see it” and the question
“What can not I see ?” the required commonsense knowledge includes: “If something big comes in between me and
the stage then my sight is blocked; pillar represents something big; and if my sight is blocked then I can not see.” As
we can see that this commonsense knowledge does not fit into
the above two categories.

3

Our Approach

Our approach is based on three main tasks, namely, semantic
parsing of text, automatic extraction of commonsense knowledge about the input text and using a graph based reasoning
on the semantic representations of both the input and the commonsense knowledge to get the answer to the WSC schema
questions. The sections below explain each of these tasks
along with the tools and techniques that we developed.

3.1

Semantic Parsing: K-Parser (kparser.org)

A semantic representation of text is considered good if it can
express the structure of the text, can distinguish between the
events and their environment in the text, uses a general set of
relations between the events and their participants, and is able
to represent the same events or entities in different perspectives. Keeping these features in mind, we have developed a
graph based semantic parser (Knowledge Parser or K-Parser)
that produces a semantic representation of the input text with
the following properties:
• Has an acyclic graphical representation for English text.
The representation is easy to read.
• Has a rich ontology (KM [2004]) to represent semantic
relations (Event-Event relations such as causes, caused by,
Event-Entity relations such as agent, and Entity-Entity relations such as related to).
1
including
#4,
#6,
#72
and
http://www.cs.nyu.edu/davise/papers/WS.html
2
including #34, #35, #41, #48, #50 and #43

#23

from

• Has special relations (instance of and prototype of ) to represent the existential and universal quantification of entities.
• Has two levels of conceptual class information for words.
• Accumulates semantic roles of entities based on PropBank
framesets [Palmer et al., 2005].
• Has tenses of the verbs in the input text.
• Has other features such as an optional Co-reference resolution, Word Sense Disambiguation and Named Entity Tagging.
Algorithm 1 demonstrates the steps used to create the semantic graph in K-Parser. The algorithm consists of five priAlgorithm 1 K-Parser Algorithm
1: procedure C REATE G RAPH(text)
2:
S ← E XTRACT S YN D EPS(text)
3:
G ← S EMANTIC M APPING(S, LKM )
4:
for all node v  G do
5:
G ← G + G ET C LASS(v, W Sv ) . W Sv =word
sense of v
6:
for all edge e  G do
7:
E DGE L ABEL C ORRECTION(G)
8:
G ← A DD F EATURE(G, SRLent ) . Semantic Roles
of Entities
9:
G ← A DD F EATURE(G, CRent )
. Co-reference
Resolution
10:
return G
. The Semantic Graph
mary modules. The first module ExtractSynDeps is used
to extract the syntactic dependency graph from the input text.
We used Stanford Dependency Parser [De Marneffe et al.,
2006] for this purpose.
The second module, SemanticM apping is used to map
the syntactic dependency relations to KM relations [2004]
and a few newly created relations. There are three methods
used for semantic mapping. First, we used mapping rules to
map syntactic dependencies into semantic relations. For example the nominal subject dependency is mapped to agent relation. Second, we developed a multi-class multilayer perceptron classifier for disambiguating different senses of prepositions and assign the semantic relations appropriately. The
training data for classification is taken from The Preposition
Project [Litkowski, 2013] and the sense ids for prepositions
are manually mapped to KM relations. Third, we used the
discourse connectives in the text to label the event-event relations. We labeled different connectives with different labels. For example, the coordinate connectives such as but,
and, comma (,) and stop(.) are labeled as next event. Other
connectives are also labeled based on their effect, such as because and so are labeled caused by and causes respectively.
The third module, GetClass accumulates two level of
classes for each node in the output of Semantic Mapping
function. Word Sense Disambiguation [Basile et al., 2007]
along with the lexical senses from WordNet [1995] are used
for this task. The fourth module, EdgeLabelCorrection corrects the mappings done by the mapping function by using
class information extracted by the third function. For example, if there is a relation is possessed by between two nodes
with their superclass as person, then the relation is corrected
to related to (because a person can not possess another per-

Figure 1: K-Parser output for “The man could not lift his son because he was so weak.
son). Lastly, the AddF eature module is used to implement
other features such as semantic roles of the entities by using Propbank Framesets [Palmer et al., 2005]. An option for
co-reference resolution is also provided in the system which
uses the Stanford Co-reference resolver [2010]. Furthermore,
many other tools are also used at various steps in the above
mentioned algorithm, such as Named Entity Tagging, WordNet [1995] database and Weka statistical classifier library
[Dimov et al., 2007]. Figure 1 demonstrates the output of KParser for the sentence The man could not lift his son because
he was so weak. We also defined an algorithm consisting of
a set of rules to match a question’s semantic representation
with that of the respective sentence’s and extract the pronoun
to be resolved from the sentence.
Kparser is a general semantic parser which has been used
beyond addressing WSC. In particular, it has been used in
parsing text in image interpretation and engineering design
specification, and is being used in interactive planning.

3.2

Knowledge Hunting

The questions in Winograd Schema Challenge can be easily
answered by human beings using simple knowledge that they
have learned over the years. One of the ways they learn is by
reading. For example, a Guardian article3 states that “There
is evidence that reading can increase levels of all three major categories of intelligence.” For example in the Winograd
Schema, Sentence: The man couldn’t lift his son because he
was so weak. Question: Who was so weak?; the answer to the
question can be achieved by using the commonsense knowledge that if X could not lift Y then X may be weak.
In our system we try to imitate this. The only difference
is that we retrieve the commonsense knowledge in an ondemand manner, and only relevant to the given sentence and
the question. We do that by creating string queries from the
3
http://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/23/can-readingmake-you-smarter

concepts in the sentence and the question and use the queries
to retrieve sentences from a text repository.
We now use the above mentioned example to explain the
two step process. The first step is to create a query set by
using the representation of the given sentence and question.
Following are the sets of queries that are created:
• The first set of queries is created by using formal representations of both the Winograd sentence and the question.
All the nodes from the question’s formal representation (except the ones which represent “Wh” words) are mapped into
the formal representation of the given sentence. From the
mapped output, all the words/nodes which do not specify a
nominal entity are extracted and their different combinations
are joined together using a wild card (.*) and quotes (“”).
An example query for the lift example mentioned above is,
“.*could not lift.*because.*weak.*”.
• The second set of queries is created by replacing the verbs
in the previously created set of queries by their synonyms.
For example, a new query for the lift example that is generated is: “.*could not raise.*because.*weak.*”, where raise is
a synonym of lift.
Finally, a combined set of queries is formed by merging the
above two sets. The second sub-step in the commonsense
knowledge extraction process is to automatically search a
large corpus of English text using the queries and extract the
sentences which contain all the words (in any form) in the respective query. We used the Google search engine API along
with sentence splitting to get such sentences from the textual
part of WWW but the searching can be performed on other
text repositories as well. The idea here is to extract the sentences which contain the commonsense knowledge that is required to answer the question about the given Winograd sentence. One of the sentences extracted from Google by using the above mentioned queries for the lift example is “She
could not lift it because she is a weak girl.” In general, in
English language, when a sentence has two mentions of the
same pronoun (e.g. she) then, they both represent the same

Figure 2: K-Parser output for “She could not lift it because she is a weak girl.
entity. We use that in post-processing. Such post processing
is performed on the semantic representation of the sentence.
Figure 2 demonstrates the output of K-Parser for the sentence
“She could not lift it because she is a weak girl.”

3.3

Reasoning on Semantic Graphs

This section explains the module that answers the input questions using logical reasoning on the K-Parser output. The
module uses the semantic representation graphs of the given
sentence, and the sentences containing commonsense knowledge obtained by the knowledge hunting step. As mentioned in Section 2, we focus on the two categories of sentences: Direct Causal Events and Causal Attributive. We
use similar reasoning (i.e., matching) techniques for both of
them. Each given sentence and corresponding commonsense
knowledge sentences are translated into the semantic representation graphs, by using the K-Parser system. They are then
matched using a set of rules and logical constructs.
Consider our running example, where the semantic representation of the input sentence is shown in Figure 1, of the
common sense sentence is shown in Figure 2, and the question is “Who was so weak?”. From the question and the graph
of input sentence (Figure 1), we first find out that the pronoun to be resolved is he 9. We also find the event directly
connect to it (lif t 5), and the trait/property associated with it
(weak 12).
Next we extract similar features from the commonsense
knowledge sentence (Figure 2). We then match event lif t 4
and trait weak 13 to event lif t 5 and trait weak 12 in the
other graph. Next, we reason that the entity she 10 (Figure
2) must match to he 9 (Figure 1). Since the commonsense
knowledge sentence (in Figure 2) is simpler and there is no
ambiguity, we determine that she 10 and she 1 refer to the
same entity. From this, we deduce that the agent of event lift
is also its participant. Applying this knowledge on the input sentence (Figure 1), we have that the agent man 2 is the
co-referent of he 9, which is what we were looking for.

We have used Answer Set Programming (ASP) [Gelfond
and Lifschitz, 1988; Baral, 2003] to define the rules and constructs for reasoning. The semantic graphs are translated into
the ASP constructs by using quaternary predicate has. For
example, has(winograd,X,R,Y) means that (1) there exists an
edge in the semantic graph of the WSC sentence has end
nodes X and Y ; and (2) the semantic relation between them
is R. Alternatively, we use has(commonsense,X,R,Y) if the
edge is in the commonsense knowledge graph. We also use
toBeResolved(Pronoun) to define the pronoun to be resolved.
The following section gives more details about the reasoning rules. (A version of the ASP rules are available at
[Sharma, 2014].)
General Properties:
Three types of nodes: Events, Entities, and Classes (in
five possible types - see the legend in Figure 1) are used to
define the set of properties mentioned below.
• The basic transitivity relationship between two event nodes
is defined if an event node is reachable from another event
node, traversing along any directed edge in the semantic
graph.
• If two different nodes in different sentences (Winograd
or Commonsense) are instances of the same class then
they are defined as cross context siblings. For example
crossContextSiblings(lif t 5, lif t 4) follows from Figure
1 & 2.
• A node in any semantic graph is defined to have negative
polarity if it has an outgoing edge labeled as negative. For
example negativeP olarity(lif t 5) follows from Figure 1.
Type Specific Properties:
Type1: Causal Attributive:
• In the semantic graph of the Winograd sentence, if
there is an event node connected to the pronoun to be
resolved with an edge labeled participant, and there exists
an edge has(winograd, X, trait, B); then we define a
predicate attSubgraph(winograd, A, X, B). For example,

attSubgraph(winograd, lif t 5, he, weak) follows from
figure 1.
• A predicate that extracts nodes from the semantic
representation of the commonsense knowledge graph is
defined.
I.e., attSubgraph(commonsense, A, X, B),
if there exists attSubgraph(winograd, A1, X1, B1)
where
crossContextSiblings(A, A1)
and
crossContextSiblings(B, B1).
For
example
attSubgraph(commonsense, lif t 4, she 10, weak 13)
follows from figure 1 and 2.
• Finally the co-referent of the pronoun to be resolved
in
the
predicate
hasCoref erent(X, C)
if
attSubgraph(commonsense, A1, X1, B1),
has(commonsense, A1, R, X1)
and
there
exists an edge in the winograd sentence’s semantic graph has(winograd, A, R, C), (C6=X), where
crossContextSiblings(A, A1).
For
example,
hasCoref erent(he 9, man 2) follows from figure 1.
Type2: Direct Causal Events The reasoning for this type is
similar to the other type with a different set of predicates and
their definitions.
• There are two event nodes connected transitively in the
semantic graph of the Winograd sentence. First step is to
identify the similar chain of two transitive event nodes from
commonsense sentence’s semantic graph by using the general
properties defined in the previous section.
• A subgraph from the semantic representation of the given
Winograd sentence is extracted which consists of the pronoun
to be resolved and the events and entities required to resolve
it to its antecedent. A similar subgraph, based on the general
properties and matching event nodes extracted in the previous step is extracted from the semantic representation of the
commonsense sentence.
• Finally, both the subgraphs extracted in the previous steps
are compared (similar to Type1 reasoning mentioned above)
and the resolution of pronoun is done.

4

Evaluation and Error Analysis

Although, the purpose of this paper is to present a novel technique that hunts for commonsense knowledge and uses it to
answer difficult questions, we have evaluated our approach in
parts and as a whole. We first evaluated the K-parser component by itself and then evaluated the whole system with
respect to WSC.

4.1

K-Parser Evaluation

We developed K-Parser by using the training sentences collected from many sources such as the example sentences from
Stanford dependency manual [2008] and dictionary examples
for sentences with conjunctions. Though our initial intention behind developing K-Parser was to solve WSC, we realized that a non domain-specific semantic parser could help
us achieve our goal and would be a general contribution to
the NLP community. We evaluated the K-Parser’s output
for the test sentences from WSC against the manually created gold standard representations. We identified five important categories to assess the accuracy of K-Parser. The
categories are Number of Events, Number of Entities, Num-

Table 1: Evaluation Results table

Events
Entities
Classes
Event-Event Relations
Event-Entity Relations

Precision
0.94
0.97
0.86
0.91
0.94

Recall
0.92
0.96
0.79
0.79
0.89

ber of Classes, Number of Event-Event Relations and Number of Event-Entity Relations. We defined Precision and Recall of our system based on the above categories, Precision
= t1 /(t1 + t2 + t3 ), Recall = t1 /(t1 + t2 + t4 ), where, t1 =
identified and relevant and the label is correct; t2 = identified
and relevant and the label is wrong; t3 = identified, but not
relevant; t4 = not identified, but relevant.
Table 1 shows the evaluation results for K-Parser.

4.2

Overall System Evaluation and Error Analysis

There are 282 total sentence and question pairs in the Winograd Schema Challenge corpus. Out of those, we identified
a total of 71 sentences from both the categories Causal Attributive and Direct Causal Events. Among the 71 pairs, our
system is able to answer 53 and the remaining 18 pairs are
left unanswered. Out of the 53 answered, 49 are correctly answered. Four of them are incorrectly answered because the
commonsense knowledge found was inappropriate. For example the commonsense knowledge “I paid the price for my
stupidity. How grateful I am” was found for the Winograd
Schema sentence, Bob paid for Charlie’s college education,
he is very grateful. In this sentence, there is only one entity in the commonsense sentence (presented by the words, I
and my. As mentioned earlier, these words are post processed
as one in our semantic representation). Hence, this particular
extracted knowledge is not appropriate for the given sentence.
It must also be noted that our system does not return any
answer if no commonsense knowledge is found or it is not
sufficient to answer the question. This property is advantageous because it provides the ability to use another commonsense knowledge source and this process is repeatable. Furthermore, if the system finds multiple answers for the same
question, then the support for each answer is calculated in
terms of count and the answer with maximum support is the
final answer.

5

Related Works

The above sections explain two main components of our approach towards solving the WSC. In this section we compare
the tools we developed along with our approach in whole
with the currently existing tools and techniques that attempt
to solves these problems. Hence, we divide the comparison
section in two categories mentioned below.

5.1

Semantic Parsers

The semantic parsing systems available today belong to many
categories. For example, there are systems [Berant and Liang,

2014; Fader et al., 2014] that aim at translating factual questions into query representations. These queries are useful
to extract the answer to the given questions from a factual
knowledge base such as Freebase. Another category consists
of Semantic Role Labeling systems such as [Punyakanok et
al., 2004] and SEMAFOR parser [Das et al., 2010]. While
they assign semantic roles to entities and events in the text,
they lack the causal or non-causal relations between events or
actions. Furthermore, these systems do not correctly process
the implications, quantifications and conceptual class information about the text (eg. ”John” is an instance of ”person”
class). The category of semantic parsers that are non-domain
specific can be further classified to two classes. The first class
consists of systems which translate a given text into a logical
language. For example, Boxer [Bos, 2008] translates English
sentences into first order logic. Despite its many advantages,
it does not capture the event-event and event-entity relations
in the text. The inclusion of the homonym-hypernym information and resolution of identical meaning words are important for downstream reasoning. Such ontological information about entities or similarities between connectives are also
not captured in the Boxer system. The second class consists
of parsers which translate the given text into a graph based
representation. Each node in the graph represents a word or
concept and the edges (obtained from a predefined or newly
defined ontology) represent the relation between those concepts. For example Flanigan et al., [2014] illustrate a semantic parser that translates natural language strings into Abstract
Meaning Representation (AMR) [Banarescu et al., 2013].
AMR has limitations such as it does not have meaningful relation labels (e.g. ARG1, ARG2,... instead of agent, recipient...)
and event-event relations. TRIPS parser [Allen et al., 2007;
Dzikovska et al., 2003] also falls in the class of graph based
semantic parsers. It encodes features such as the conceptual
classes of the words, quantification of entities, and representation of the participants of an event. However, event-event
relations are not captured by this system.

5.2

Winograd Schema Challenge

There are few published techniques that aim at solving the
Winograd Schema Challenge or a similar corpus. One of
them is demonstrated by Rahman et al., [2012] which uses
a number of techniques to resolve pronouns in a Winograd
Schema like corpus. Their system uses various techniques
and combine their results on a corpus of 941 such schema.
There are a few issues with the techniques used in their system. For example a technique used by them creates string
queries from given sentences and finds the support for the
queries from Google search results. The issue with this technique is that sometimes the queries do not justify the outcome
of the technique. For example, a query for the sentence Lions
eat zebras because they are predators is “Lions are predators”. It makes sense to find the support for lions being predators based on this query. But if the sentence is changed to
Lions eat zebras because they are hungry then the support for
the query “Lions are hungry” is not capable of justifying the
fact that they in the sentence refers to Lions. This is because
zebras are equally likely to be hungry if no context is provided. A different work that attempts to solve the WSC by

using the modifications of above mentioned techniques along
with new ones is demonstrated in [Budukh, 2013]. However
the techniques performs decently on the WSC, the deeper
analysis of results leads to a conclusion that most of the correct answers do not follow humanoid reasoning, in fact they
are correct by chance.
Another work by Schuller [2014], demonstrates a graph
based technique and performs experiments on 4 out of 141
Winograd Schema pairs. It converts the given Winograd
sentence to a dependency graph using Stanford dependency
parser and then manually creates a background knowledge
dependency graph which is required to answer the question.
The main contribution of this work is to formalize a way to
combine both a given sentence dependency graph and the
manually created background knowledge dependency graph
in using relevance theory and then use Answer Set Programming (ASP) to extract the answer. But, unlike our approach,
commonsense knowledge is not automatically extracted by
this system.

6

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we report on our development of a semantic
parser (K-Parser) and a knowledge hunting mechanism and
their use in addressing the WSC. Given a WSC schema our
knowledge hunting mechanism searches a text repository to
find needed knowledge for that schema. For example, for the
sentence in Figure 1 and the question “Who was so weak”,
our system finds the sentence in Figure 2. The knowledge in
that sentence about X cannot lift Y when X is weak is needed
to answer the question. Indeed, our system uses that knowledge in answering the question. Whether this knowledge is a
deep background knowledge or is an evidence from the text
is a matter of where the line is drawn regarding when an evidence becomes knowledge. Regardless, our usage of knowledge of the form “X cannot lift Y when X is weak” is an
example of commonsense reasoning and is more meaningful
than bag-of-words or related statistical approaches commonly
used in NLP and NLU.
Although we achieved a notable accuracy on the two identified WSC categories (that covers 71 of 282 schemas), a lot
more remains to be done. As future work, we are working on identifying other categories of Winograd Schema sentences. We are also trying to create a knowledge repository of
commonsense knowledge by extracting the knowledge from
text repositories. But, additional success on these may imply that there is a need to develop a harder challenge schema
that would require deeper knowledge and more involved commonsense reasoning. We believe that to obtain more involved
knowledge from text, there is a need to go beyond standard
fact extraction approaches to semantic translation of text. The
research call by the Paul G. Allen foundation, and other research initiatives (such as the “Machine Reading” initiative)
have similar motivations and implications.

Acknowledgements
We thank NSF for the DataNet Federation Consortium grant
OCI-0940841 and ONR for their grant N00014-13-1-0334 for
partially supporting this research.

References
[Allen et al., 2007] James Allen, Mehdi Manshadi, Myroslava Dzikovska, and Mary Swift. Deep linguistic processing for spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Deep Linguistic Processing, pages 49–
56. ACL, 2007.
[Banarescu et al., 2013] Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial,
Shu Cai, Madalina Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and
Nathan Schneider. Abstract meaning representation for
sembanking. In Proc. of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse. Citeseer, 2013.
[Baral, 2003] Chitta Baral. Knowledge representation, reasoning and declarative problem solving. Cambridge university press, 2003.
[Basile et al., 2007] Pierpaolo Basile, Marco Degemmis,
Anna Lisa Gentile, Pasquale Lops, and Giovanni Semeraro. The jigsaw algorithm for word sense disambiguation and semantic indexing of documents. pages 314–325,
2007.
[Berant and Liang, 2014] Jonathan Berant and Percy Liang.
Semantic parsing via paraphrasing. In Proceedings of
ACL, 2014.
[Bos, 2008] Johan Bos. Wide-coverage semantic analysis
with boxer. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on
Semantics in Text Processing, pages 277–286. ACL, 2008.
[Budukh, 2013] Tejas Ulhas Budukh. An intelligent coreference resolver for winograd schema sentences containing resolved semantic entities. Master’s thesis, Arizona
State University, 2013.
[Clark et al., 2004] Peter Clark, Bruce Porter, and Boeing Phantom Works. Km - the knowledge machine 2.0:
Users manual. Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, 2004.
[Das et al., 2010] Dipanjan Das, Nathan Schneider, Desai
Chen, and Noah A Smith. Semafor 1.0: A probabilistic
frame-semantic parser. Language Technologies Institute,
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
2010.
[De Marneffe and Manning, 2008] Marie-Catherine
De Marneffe and Christopher D Manning. Stanford
typed dependencies manual. URL http://nlp. stanford.
edu/software/dependencies manual. pdf, 2008.
[De Marneffe et al., 2006] Marie-Catherine De Marneffe,
Bill MacCartney, Christopher D Manning, et al. Generating typed dependency parses from phrase structure parses.
In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 449–454, 2006.
[Dimov et al., 2007] Rossen Dimov,
Michael Feld,
Dr Michael Kipp, Dr Alassane Ndiaye, and Dr Dominik Heckmann. Weka: Practical machine learning
tools and techniques with java implementations. AI Tools
SeminarUniversity of Saarland, WS, 6(07), 2007.
[Dzikovska et al., 2003] Myroslava O Dzikovska, James F
Allen, and Mary D Swift. Integrating linguistic and domain knowledge for spoken dialogue systems in multiple

domains. In Proc. of IJCAI-03 Workshop on Knowledge
and Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems, 2003.
[Fader et al., 2014] Anthony Fader, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
Oren Etzioni. Open question answering over curated
and extracted knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the
20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1156–1165. ACM,
2014.
[Flanigan et al., 2014] Jeffrey Flanigan, Sam Thomson,
Jaime Carbonell, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith. A discriminative graph-based parser for the abstract meaning
representation. 2014.
[Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1988] Michael
Gelfond
and
Vladimir Lifschitz. The stable model semantics for
logic programming. In ICLP/SLP, volume 88, pages
1070–1080, 1988.
[Levesque et al., 2011] Hector J Levesque, Ernest Davis,
and Leora Morgenstern. The winograd schema challenge.
In AAAI Spring Symposium: Logical Formalizations of
Commonsense Reasoning, 2011.
[Litkowski, 2013] Ken Litkowski. The preposition project
corpora. Technical report, Technical Report 13-01. Damascus, MD: CL Research, 2013.
[Miller, 1995] George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database
for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41,
1995.
[Palmer et al., 2005] Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and
Paul Kingsbury. The proposition bank: An annotated
corpus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106, 2005.
[Punyakanok et al., 2004] Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth,
Wen-tau Yih, and Dav Zimak. Semantic role labeling via
integer linear programming inference. In Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on Computational Linguistics, page 1346. ACL, 2004.
[Raghunathan et al., 2010] Karthik Raghunathan, Heeyoung
Lee, Sudarshan Rangarajan, Nathanael Chambers, Mihai
Surdeanu, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning. A
multi-pass sieve for coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on EMNLP, pages 492–501.
ACL, 2010.
[Rahman and Ng, 2012] Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. Resolving complex cases of definite pronouns: the winograd
schema challenge. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL, pages 777–789. ACL,
2012.
[Schuller, 2014] Peter Schuller. Tackling winograd schemas
by formalizing relevance theory in knowledge graphs. International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, 2014.
[Sharma, 2014] Arpit Sharma. Solving winograd schema
challenge: Using semantic parsing, automatic knowledge
acquisition and logical reasoning. Master’s thesis, Arizona
State University, 2014.

