Analysis of On-line Routing and Spectrum
Allocation in Spectrum-sliced Optical Networks
Shahrzad Shirazipourazad, Zahra Derakhshandeh and Arunabha Sen
School of Computing, Informatics and Decision System Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona 85287
Email: {sshiraz1, zderakhs, asen}@asu.edu

Abstract—The orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) technology provides an opportunity for efficient resource utilization in optical networks. It allows allocation of
multiple sub-carriers to meet traffic demands of varying size.
Utilizing OFDM technology, a spectrum efficient and scalable optical transport network called SLICE was proposed recently. The
SLICE architecture enables sub-wavelength, super-wavelength
resource allocation and multiple rate data traffic that results
in efficient use of spectrum. However, the benefit is accompanied
by additional complexities in resource allocation. In SLICE
architecture, in order to minimize utilized spectrum, one has
to solve the routing and spectrum allocation (RSA) problem, a
generalization of the routing and wavelength allocation (RWA)
problem. In this paper, we focus our attention to the on-line
version of RSA problem and provide an algorithm for the ring
network with a competitive ratio of min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))}
where k is the total number of requests and dmax is the maximum
demand in terms of the number of sub-carriers. Moreover, we
provide a heuristic for the network with arbitrary topology
and measure the effectiveness of the heuristic with extensive
simulation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
It is being increasingly recognized by the optical network
designers that in order to meet the challenges posed by the
explosive growth of the network traffic, the networks must
be operated in the most innovative and efficient manner. The
traditional WDM network operates at the granularity of a
wavelength, which may lead to inefficient use of resources
as some connection requests may not have enough traffic
to utilize the full capacity of a wavelength. However such
wastage of networking resources can be avoided if the optical
network can be made to operate at a finer grain (i.e., subwavelength level) instead of the current practice of course
grain operation (i.e., wavelength level). Recent introduction of
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) technology in optical networks [1] offers an opportunity for
operating optical networks at a much finer grain than what
is currently possible. The advantages offered by the OFDM in
terms of flexibility and scalability originate from the unique
multicarrier nature of this technology [1].
Utilizing the OFDM technology, a spectrum efficient and
scalable optical transport network called spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network (SLICE) was proposed recently [2].
Just as the ability to operate at a granularity finer than a
wavelength (i.e., a sub-wavelength) will enable the network
operator to manage resources more efficiently, the same is

true if the operator is provided with capability to operate at
super-wavelength granularity. Such a capability will be useful
for the network operator to meet large traffic demand. The
goal of SLICE architecture is to allocate variable sized optical
bandwidths that matches with the user traffic demands. It
achieves that goal by slicing off spectral resources of a route
and allocating only the requested amount to establish an endto-end optical path.
Although the sub-wavelength (sub-carrier) level allocation
capability of SLICE leads to more effective resource utilization, it also leads to additional complexities in network control
and management. First, if a call requests for d sub-carriers, the
network controller must allocate d consecutive sub-carriers to
this request. Second, if the paths corresponding to two requests
R1 and R2 share a fiber link, not only the set of carriers
allocated to R1 and R2 must be disjoint, in order to avoid
interference, they must be separated from each other in the
spectrum domain by a few carriers, known as guard carriers
or guard bands. The first and the second constraints are known
as the sub-carrier consecutiveness constraint and the guardcarrier constraint respectively [3]. The introduction of the subcarrier consecutiveness constraint significantly increases the
complexity of the Routing and Spectrum Assignment (RSA)
problem that needs to be solved in SLICE. The RSA problem may be informally defined as follows: Given a network
topology and a set of call requests with varying demands (in
terms of the number of sub-carriers) find a route for each
request and allocate a number of sub-carriers to each request
(equal to their requested demand), so that the utilized part
of the spectrum span is minimized. It may be noted that if
the demand of each request is one sub-carrier, then the RSA
problem reduces to the Routing and Wavelength Assignment
(RWA) problem, which has been studied extensively. One can
conceive of two different versions of the RSA problem - offline and on-line. In the off-line version all the requests are
known ahead of time before path and spectrum allocation for
any request is carried out. In the on-line version, the requests
come in a sequence and path and spectrum allocation for a
request has to carried out at the time of arrival of that request.
Because the off-line version has the luxury of knowing all
the requests, it can carry out better optimization of utilized
spectrum span than its on-line counterpart.
In this paper we study the on-line version of RSA problem.
Previous studies on the on-line version of the RSA problem,

[4]–[9] primarily focus on the development of efficient heuristics for the problem. The effectiveness of these heuristics are
primarily evaluated through simulation. To the best of our
knowledge, very little analytical results are available in the
literature regarding the performance of these heuristics. In
this paper we present analytical results relating to the on-line
version of the RSA problem when the network topology is
a ring. The performance of an on-line algorithm is measured
in terms of the metric competitive ratio. In this metric, the
performance of an on-line algorithm is compared with the
performance of an optimal off-line algorithm that knows the
sequence of requests in advance. The maximum ratio between
their respective performances, taken over all sequences, is
known as the competitive ratio of the algorithm [10].
In this paper, we provide an algorithm for the on-line version
of the RSA problem for the ring network with a competitive
ratio of min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))} where k is the total
number of requests, dmax = max1≤i≤k di , and di is the
demand in terms of the number of sub-carriers associated with
request Ri . Moreover, we provide a heuristic for the network
with arbitrary topology and measure the effectiveness of the
heuristic with extensive simulation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss
related works in section II. In section III we introduce definitions and notations. We present problem statement for the
on-line RSA problem in section IV. Analytical results for
on-line RSA in rings is presented in section V. A heuristic
and experimental results for the arbitrary network topology is
presented in section VI. Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Utilizing the optical OFDM technology, the SLICE architecture proposes a novel scheme for slicing off the spectral
resources of a route, resulting in more efficient utilization [2].
The fact that the sub-carriers in the SLICE architecture have
to be assigned in a contiguous manner, led to the formulation
of the RSA problem. To the best of our knowledge, the
RSA problem was originally introduced in [4], [11], [12].
Since then a few other papers, [3], [13] have also studied
the RSA problem. In most of these studies [3], [12]–[14], the
authors propose an integer linear program based solution and a
heuristic solution for the off-line RSA problem. Based on the
experimental results, the authors claim effectiveness of their
heuristics.
The on-line version of RSA problem has been studied in
[4]–[9]. In all of these papers, the objective of the on-line
RSA problem is to maximize the number of requests that
can be satisfied and minimize the blocking probability. In
this version of on-line RSA problem, the number of available
spectrum sub-carriers is limited. The authors of these papers
proposed heuristic solutions mainly by modifying the Dijkstra
shortest path algorithm or using K-shortest path algorithm
accompanying with the First-Fit algorithm. To the best of
our knowledge none of these papers consider the objective
of minimizing the utilized spectrum while satisfying all the
requests. It may be the case that all the requests should be
satisfied while the utilized spectrum is minimized. In this paper

we propose a new heuristic for arbitrary network graphs. We
also modify the K-shortest path approach for this version of
the on-line RSA and through simulations we evaluate their
performance.
Most of the studies both on on-line and off-line RSA do
not present any analytical results for the RSA problem, even
for the simplest optical network topologies such as rings. The
ring topology is of particular importance in the optical domain
because of its application in metro networks and in some
long haul networks. A major thrust of our effort is to present
analytical results for the on-line RSA for optical networks with
ring structure.
III. D EFINITIONS AND N OTATIONS
Spectrum Slice/Interval: A number of consecutive sub-carriers
from ai to bi denoted by [ai , bi ], that is allocated to a specific
request Ri to establish a connection between (si , ti ) with di
sub-carriers. The length of this slice is bi − ai + 1 = di .
Spectrum Span/Spread: The total amount of spectrum used
for allocating a slice to all the requests; If Ri , 1 ≤ i ≤ k is
allocated the spectrum interval [ai , bi ] then the spectrum span
is [ min ai , max bi ].
1≤i≤k

1≤i≤k

Chromatic Number: The Chromatic Number, χ(G), of a graph
G = (V, E) is the fewest number of colors necessary to color
the nodes of the graph, such that no two adjacent nodes have
the same color.
Interval Chromatic Number (ICN): Consider a weighted graph
G∗ = (V, E, w) with a strictly positive integer weight w(v)
associated with each node v ∈ V . An interval t-coloring of
G∗ = (V, E, w) is a function c from V to {1,2, . . . , t} such
that c(x) + w(x) − 1 ≤ t and if both c(x) ≤ c(y) and (x, y) ∈
E then c(x) + w(x) − 1 < c(y). We can view an interval
coloring c of G∗ as assigning an interval [c(v), . . . , c(v) +
w(v) − 1] of w(v) consecutive colors to each vertex v so
that the intervals of colors assigned to two adjacent vertices
(i.e., the pair of nodes that has an edge between them) do not
overlap. If interval t-coloring is feasible for a graph G∗ then
G∗ is said to be interval t-colorable. The interval chromatic
number of G∗ , denoted by χint (G∗ ) is the least t such that
G∗ has a interval t-coloring [15].
Interval Graph: Let F be a family of non-empty sets. The
intersection graph of F is obtained by representing each set
in F by a node and connecting the two nodes with an edge, if
and only if the corresponding sets intersect. The intersection
graph of a family of intervals on a linearly ordered set (such
as the real line) is called Interval Graph.
Path Intersection Graph: Consider a graph G = (V, E) and
a set of paths P = {P1 , . . . , Pk }, where each Pi is a path
between a node pair (si , ti ), ∀i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k. A graph G0 =
(V 0 , E 0 ) is a Path Intersection Graph corresponding to P, if
each vertex pi ∈ V 0 corresponds to a path Pi ∈ P and two
nodes pi and pj in V 0 have an edge between them, if the
corresponding paths Pi and Pj in P have at least one common
edge in E.
IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section we provide a formal statement of the on-line
routing and spectrum allocation problem.

On-line Routing and Spectrum Allocation (RSA) Problem:
A graph G = (V, E) representing the network topology is
given. The connection requests arrive in a sequence one by one
where k is the total number of requests. The ith connection
request is denoted by a triple Ri = (si , ti , di ), 1 ≤ i ≤ k,
where si represents a source node, ti represents a destination
node, and di represents the demand between si and ti in terms
of sub-carriers. Once a request Ri arrives without knowledge
of the future requests, assign a path Pi from si to ti and
assign a spectrum interval Ii = [ai , bi ] of length di to Pi ,
such that for every pair of requests i and j, j ≤ i the intervals
Ii and Ij do not overlap if the corresponding paths Pi and Pj
share an edge between them in G = (V, E). Moreover, if the
paths Pi and Pj overlap, not only the corresponding intervals
Ii and Ij must be non-overlapping, these two intervals must
be separated by a fixed number of sub-carriers, known as
the guard band. The objective is to minimize spectrum span,
I = [min1≤i≤k ai , max1≤i≤k bi ]. Without loss of generality,
we number the first available sub-carrier one and the rest are
numbered accordingly.
We note that guard-band constraint can be satisfied by
increasing the demand values by guard-band value g. In other
words, in an instance of RSA problem, RSA1 with guard-band
g1 > 0 and requests {Ri = (si , ti , di )|1 ≤ i ≤ k}, we can
increase the demand values in each request by g1 and consider
another instance of RSA, RSA2 where guard-band g2 = 0 and
for every request Ri in RSA1 , request Ri0 = (si , ti , di + g1 )
is added to RSA2 . Then the optimal solution of RSA2 can
be used to create the optimal solution of RSA1 by removing
the last g1 sub-carriers from each spectrum slice assigned to
each request (for the proof, reader is referred to the proof of
the Observation 4 in [16]). As a result, from this point onward
we assume that guard-band is zero.
The RSA problem has two distinct components - the routing
component and the spectrum allocation component. When
routing is given and the paths for the requests are known
then interval chromatic number (ICN) of the intersection graph
of request paths finds the solution of the SA problem. Let
G0 = (V 0 , E 0 , w) be the weighted path intersection graph of
paths of all requests where V 0 = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } and each
node pi corresponds to the path of request Ri and the weight
of pi is di ; i.e., w(pi ) = di . Let χint (G0 ) be the ICN of graph
G0 . In computation of χint (G0 ), each node pi ∈ V 0 is assigned
an interval [ai , bi ] of colors with length w(pi ) = di where the
intervals of two adjacent vertices do not intersect and total
number of distinct colors used is minimum. Therefore, interval
[ai , bi ] can be allocated to the path Pi in G and no two paths
with common edge intersect in their spectrum intervals. Hence,
the spectrum span of χint (G0 ) is sufficient for the spectrum
allocation of requests in G with predefined set of paths P.
Moreover, χint (G0 ) is the minimum spectrum span needed in
the SA problem; otherwise, it contradicts with χint (G0 ) being
the minimum interval chromatic number of G0 . It is known
that computation of ICN of interval graphs is NP-complete
(Problem SR2 in [17]).
Fig. 1 shows an example of SA instance where the network
graph is a ring with 8 nodes and requests are {R1 =

p1

1
8

2

p3

p4

3

7

6

4

p2

p5

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) An example of SA instance where the network graph is a ring
(b) Path intersection graph G0 of SA instance in (a)

(1, 3, 15), R2 = (1, 6, 6), R3 = (2, 5, 6), R4 = (2, 8, 6), R5 =
(4, 7, 12)}. Dashed lines show the paths for the requests. Fig.
1(b) depicts G0 , the path intersection graph of these paths
where w(p1 ) = 15, w(p2 ) = 6, w(p3 ) = 6, w(p4 ) = 6
and w(p5 ) = 12. In this example, χint (G0 ) is 24 where
the requests R1 to R5 are assigned intervals [1, 15], [13, 18],
[16, 21], [19, 24] and [1, 12] respectively.
V. O N - LINE ROUTING AND S PECTRUM A LLOCATION
P ROBLEM IN R INGS
Theorem 1: RSA problem (the off-line case) is NPComplete when the optical network topology is a Ring.
Proof: If the demands of the requests in the off-line RSA
instance are all equal to one, then RSA problem becomes RWA
problem. In [18], it is proven that the RWA problem for optical
networks with a ring topology is NP-complete. Since RWA
problem is a special case of the RSA problem, it follows that
the RSA problem for optical networks with a ring topology is
also NP-complete.
Next, we propose an on-line algorithm for RSA problem
when network topology is a ring. In this algorithm, first we use
cut-one-link approach and after removing one link the induced
graph is a chain. In the chain for every request there exists
just one path. Therefore routing is trivial. For the spectrum
assignment, we use First-Fit technique that finds the first free
spectrum interval fit the demand of the current request. The
steps of the algorithms are explained in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 On-line RSA in Ring
1: Remove an edge e ∈ E randomly; Let Gp be the induced
chain;
2: while A new request arrives do
3:
Find the path for the request in graph Gp ;
4:
Compute the first free spectrum interval fit the demand
of the current request
5: end while
Theorem 2: Algorithm 1 has competitive ratio of
min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))} where k is total number of
requests and dmax = max1≤i≤k di .
Proof: In order to compute the competitive ratio we need to
compare the spectrum span of Algorithm 1 with the optimal
spectrum span of off-line RSA where the sequence of requests
is known in advance. After removing one edge randomly
from G = (V, E) in Algorithm 1, the induced graph Gp
is a chain. Let OP T and OP Tp be the optimal spectrum

span in RSA problem when network graph is G and Gp ,
respectively, and I be the size of the spectrum computed by
Algorithm 1. Clearly, the intersection graph of paths of the
requests in Gp is an interval graph (a path from node i to
node j in Gp can be interpreted as an interval from i to j).
Let G0p be the path intersection graph. Therefore, minimum
spectrum needed to satisfy requests in Gp is equivalent to the
χint (G0p ). Based on the paper [10], First-Fit algorithm will
have competitive ratio of min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(χG0p ))}
for on-line interval coloring in G0p . Also it is obvious χG0p ≤ k
(i.e., chromatic number of G0p is at most as large as the number
of nodes in G0p that is number of requests). Hence, we have (1)
I ≤ min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))} · OP Tp . We denote the
set of paths in the optimal solution of RSA (off-line) when
network graph is G by POP T . The paths in POP T can be
partitioned into two subsets, Pe1 and Pe2 such that Pe1 is the set
of paths that include edge e and the paths in Pe2 do not include
edge e. Let OP Te1 and OP Te2 be the ICN of the intersection
graph of paths in Pe1 and Pe2 respectively. Then we have (2)
OP T ≥ max(OP Te1 , OP Te2 ). Since all the paths in Pe1 have
intersection in edge e, their intervals do not intersect. Clearly,
(3) OP Tp ≤ OP Te1 + OP Te2 . The reason is that in the worst
case, all requests that were routed through edge e in POP T
are routed the other way in Gp and now they at most need
OP Te1 spectrum span not intersecting the spectrum allocated
to the paths in Pe2 . Therefore, using relations in (2) and (3)
we have OP Tp ≤ 2OP T . Also, based on relation (1) we can
conclude I ≤ min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))} · OP T .
VI. A H EURISTIC AND R ESULTS FOR G ENERAL G RAPHS
In this section first we present our heuristic for on-line
RSA problem in general graphs. Then we present the results
of our extensive simulation that demonstrate the efficacy of
our heuristic for the on-line RSA problem by comparing it
against (i) the optimal solution and (ii) the solution obtained
by executing the heuristic based on K-shortest path and FirstFit technique.
Minimum Sub-Carrier Path Heuristic (MSCP): The main
idea in our heuristic is that it tries to find disjoint paths for
routing the requests to increase the reuse of sub-carriers in
spectrum allocation. Of this concern, we define a new weight
function on the edges (fibers) of the network where weight
of an edge e ∈ E, w(e) will be largest sub-carrier number
that is used in that edge. We also define the weight of a path,
P from node s to node t to be maxe∈P {w(e)}. For each
new request, M SCP selects the path with minimum weight.
The minimum weight path can be computed by modifying the
distance function in Dijkstra algorithm so that it considers
the new weight function as the distance. After finding the
path, M SCP uses First-Fit algorithm to find the first available
spectrum slice with the length of the request demand in all
the edges of the path. Then, M SCP updates the weight of
every edge in the path to the largest sub-carrier so far used
in that edge. For each request, time complexity of minimumweight path computation is O(|V |2 ) and First-Fit algorithm
takes O(k|V |2 ) where k is the number of requests. Hence,
time complexity of M SCP is O(k 2 |V |2 ).

K-Shortest Path Heuristic (KSP): In this heuristic, initially
K shortest paths are computed between every pair of nodes
in the network using [19] algorithm with O(k|V |3 ). When
a request Ri arrives, for every path in the K shortest paths
between si and ti we compute First-Fit algorithm to find the
first available spectrum slice [ai , bi ] with the length of di .
Then we select the path whose first available spectrum slice
[ai , bi ] has the smallest bi . This algorithm takes O(Kk 2 |V |2 )
for satisfying all the k requests.
We perform our experiments on the NSFnet (Fig. 2(a)) and
the fiber network of Level-3 that spans Europe (Fig. 3(a)) [20].
We view the NSFnet and Level-3 networks as examples of a
small and a large network respectively.
In Fig. 2(b), we present the results obtained from ILP ,
M SCP and KSP when executed on the NSFnet. We find the
optimal solution of the RSA problem (off-line) by solving an
ILP using the software package CPLEX. Since computing the
optimal solution by ILP takes considerable amount of time,
we need to do this set of experiments for small number of
requests. In this set of experiments, the number of requests,
k, is varied from 2 to 6 with step of one. For each value of
k, we generate 10 instances. In each instance we generate k
requests randomly and consider them one at a time. For this
set of experiments all the demand values are at most 5, (i.e.,
dmax ≤ 5). The average spectrum span computed by each of
the three methods is shown in Fig. 2(b). It may be observed
that the average spectrum span of M SCP is closest to the
ILP almost in all cases. The ratio of the average spectrum
span of M SCP to ILP is at most 1.28 demonstrating the
closeness of the M SCP to the optimal. The results in these
experiments also show that M SCP works better than KSP
algorithm in almost all the cases even when number of paths
in KSP is K = 3. We repeat similar experiments for larger
value of k, where k = 10 and we change the value of dmax
from 5 to 25. The result of these experiments is depicted in
Fig. 2(c). It can be observed that spectrum span in M SCP is
at least 12% smaller than the span in KSP where K = 1 and
it is even smaller than the one in KSP where K = 2. When
K = 3 in KSP , KSP needs smaller spectrum span than
M SCP but its time complexity is at least 3 times M SCP .
We perform our next set of experiments on the Level-3
network shown in Fig. 3(a). In these experiments, first, we
vary k from 10 to 60 with step of 10. For a specific value of k
we generate 10 instances. In all these instances, the maximum
demand is limited to 10 (i.e., dmax ≤ 10). The average utilized
spectrum span is shown in Fig. 3(b). These results show that
M SCP efficacy with respect to utilized spectrum span is
almost the same as KSP when K = 2. We also conduct
experiments for the case that values of dmax is varied from 5
to 25 with step of 5, while keeping the number of requests
k constant at 20. We compute the average spectrum span
over 10 random instances for each value of dmax . The results
are shown in Fig. 3(c). According to these results, M SCP ’s
performance is better than KSP when K = 2 especially for
larger values of dmax . According to the last experiments we
may conclude that M SCP outperforms KSP when K = 2
for larger values of dmax .

50

NJ

IL

UT

CA1

PA

NE
CO
MD

dmax ≤ 5

7
6

KSP (K=1)
KSP (K=2)
KSP (K=3)
MSCP
ILP

5
4

3

Average Spectrum Span

NY

WA

Average Spectrum Span

8
MI

2

CA2

30
KSP (K=1)
KSP (K=2)
KSP (K=3)
MSCP

20
10
0

1

TX

k = 10

40

2

GA

3
4
5
Number of requests (k)

(a)

6

7

0

5

(b)

10
15
20
25
Maximum demand (dmax)

30

(c)

Fig. 2. (a) The 14-node NSF Network, (b) The average spectrum span in NSF Network for different values of k where dmax ≤ 5, (c) different values of
dmax where k = 10
180

160

dmax ≤ 10

160

100
80

KSP (K=1)

60

KSP (K=2)

40

MSCP

20
0

(a)

120
100
KSP (K=1)
KSP (K=2)
MSCP

80
60
40
20

0

Fig. 3.

k = 20

140

120

Average Spectrum Span

Average Spectrum Span

140

20

40
60
Number of requests (k)

(b)

80

0
0

10
20
30
Maximum demand (dmax)

40

(c)

(a) Level-3 network over Europe, (b) The average spectrum span in Level-3 network for dmax ≤ 10, (c) k = 20

VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we study on-line version of Routing and
Spectrum Allocation problem in OFDM-based optical networks. We propose an algorithm for the ring network with
a competitive ratio of min{O(log(dmax )), O(log(k))} where
k is the total number of requests and dmax is the maximum
demand. In addition, we provide a heuristic for networks with
arbitrary topology and measure its effectiveness with extensive
simulation. In future, we plan to develop efficient algorithms
for on-line RSA in networks with tree and grid topologies. We
also would like to extend our results to the case that different
modulation models can be used.
Acknowledgement The research was supported by the DTRA
grant HDTRA1-09-1-0032 and the AFOSR grant FA9550-091-0120.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Shieh, “Ofdm for flexible high-speed optical networks,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1560 –1577, 2011.
[2] M. Jinno, H. Takara, B. Kozicki, Y. Tsukishima, Y. Sone, and S. Matsuoka, “Spectrum-efficient and scalable elastic optical path network: architecture, benefits, and enabling technologies,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 66 –73, 2009.
[3] Y. Wang, X. Cao, and Y. Pan, “A study of the routing and spectrum allocation in spectrum-sliced elastic optical path networks,” in INFOCOM,
2011, pp. 1503–1511.
[4] M. Jinno, B. Kozicki, H. Takara, A. Watanabe, Y. Sone, T. Tanaka, and
A. Hirano, “Distance-adaptive spectrum resource allocation in spectrumsliced elastic optical path network [topics in optical communications],”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 138 –145, 2010.
[5] K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. Varvarigos, “Dynamic bandwidth allocation in flexible ofdm-based networks,” in OFC/NFOEC,
2011.
[6] X. Wan, N. Hua, and X. Zheng, “Dynamic routing and spectrum assignment in spectrum-flexible transparent optical networks,” IEEE/OSA
Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 4, no. 8, pp.
603 –613, 2012.

[7] T. Takagi, H. Hasegawa, K. Sato, Y. Sone, B. Kozicki, A. Hirano,
and M. Jinno, “Dynamic routing and frequency slot assignment for
elastic optical path networks that adopt distance adaptive modulation,”
in OFC/NFOEC, 2011.
[8] A. Castro, L. Velasco, M. Ruiz, M. Klinkowski, J. P. Fernández-Palacios,
and D. Careglio, “Dynamic routing and spectrum (re)allocation in future
flexgrid optical networks,” Compututer Networks, vol. 56, no. 12, pp.
2869–2883, 2012.
[9] G. Shen and Q. Yang, “From coarse grid to mini-grid to gridless: How
much can gridless help contentionless?” in OFC/NFOEC, 2011.
[10] M. G. Luby, “Tight bounds for dynamic storage allocation,” SIAM
Journal on Discrete Mathematics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 155–166, Feb. 1996.
[11] A. N. Patel, P. N. Ji, J. P. Jue, and T. Wang, “Routing, wavelength
assignment, and spectrum allocation in transparent flexible optical wdm
(fwdm) networks,” in Photonics in Switching, 2010.
[12] K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. A. Varvarigos, “Routing
and spectrum allocation in ofdm-based optical networks with elastic
bandwidth allocation,” in GLOBECOM, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[13] M. Klinkowski and K. Walkowiak, “Routing and spectrum assignment
inspectrum sliced elastic optical path network,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 884–886, 2011.
[14] K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. Varvarigos, “Elastic bandwidth allocation in flexible ofdm-based optical networks,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1354 –1366, 2011.
[15] H. A. Kierstead, “A polynomial time approximation algorithm for
dynamic storage allocation,” Discrete Mathematics, vol. 87, no. 2-3,
pp. 231–237, 1991.
[16] S. Shirazipourazad, C. Zhou, Z. Derakhshandeh, and A. Sen. On
routing and spectrum allocation in spectrum-sliced optical networks.
[Online]. Available: http://www.public.asu.edu/∼sshiraz1/RSA.pdf
[17] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability; A Guide
to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman & Co., 1990.
[18] T. Erlebach and K. Jansen, “The complexity of path coloring and call
scheduling,” Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 255, no. 1-2, pp. 33–50,
2001.
[19] J. Y. Yen, “Finding the k shortest loopless paths in a network,”
Management Science, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 712–716, 1971.
[20] Level 3 Communications, Network Map. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.level3.com/en/resource-library/maps/level-3-network-map/

