Designing a Mobile Application to Support the Indicated
Prevention and Early Intervention of Childhood Anxiety
Mandar Patwardhan

Ryan Stoll

Derek B. Hamel

Arizona State University
School of Computing, Informatics and
Decision Systems Engineering
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
Tempe, AZ USA

Arizona State University
Department of Psychology
Tempe, AZ USA

Arizona State University
School of Computing, Informatics and
Decision Systems Engineering
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
Tempe, AZ USA

Ryan.Stoll@asu.edu

mpatward@asu.edu

dbhamel@asu.edu
Kevin A. Gary

Ashish Amresh

Arizona State University
Arizona State University
School of Computing, Informatics and School of Computing, Informatics and
Decision Systems Engineering
Decision Systems Engineering
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
Tempe, AZ USA
Tempe, AZ USA

amresh@asu.edu

Armando Pina
Arizona State University
Department of Psychology
Tempe, AZ USA

Armando.Pina@asu.edu

kgary@asu.edu

ABSTRACT

1. INTRODUCTION

This paper presents the design of an mHealth application for
prevention and early intervention of childhood anxiety. The
application is based on REACH, a preventative-early intervention
protocol for childhood anxiety. This paper describes the
multidisciplinary design process, sharing lessons learned in
developing an effective mHealth application. This mHealth
application is unique due to participant age, preventive-early
intervention focus, and utilization of mobile technology in a
situated manner. A design process inspired by user-centered
leveraging key informant interviews was used to identify
application features, including game based strategies and an
animated motivational avatar. Validation was performed through
external review and a usability study performed with target end
users of the application. Results suggest overall satisfaction, ease
of use, and increased motivation.

Mobile health applications (mHealth apps) span a wide spectrum
of health-related issues and treatment approaches, such as health
monitoring (physiological or self-reported), protocol adherence
through reminder communications, and (psycho)education [15].
Interestingly, the ubiquitous and familiar nature of smartphone
devices creates the potential for mobile health (mHealth)
applications targeted to youth “at risk” for anxiety disorders or
meeting criteria for anxiety disorder diagnoses. In fact, mHealth
for anxiety disorders may be of unique importance because most
parents do not seek help for their anxious youth, effect sizes from
anxiety programs are generally modest and need to be potentiated,
and there is a pressing need for sustainable and streamlined
intervention efforts that have “real world” utility [2][3][13]. In
addition, targeting anxiety disorders is of public health
significance because these are among the most prevalent
psychiatric problems in children with rates ranging from 5% to
10% and as high as 25% in adolescents. Anxiety disorders also
cause significant impairment, typically fail to spontaneously
remit, and are prospectively linked to clinical depression and
problematic substance use for some youth [13].

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Design Tools and Techniques –
Evolutionary prototyping, and user interfaces.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors, Verification

Keywords
Youth Anxiety Prevention, mHealth, User-Centered Design.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
Wireless Health ‘15, October 14–16, 2015, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3160-9 …$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2811780.2811954

Although the popularity of mHealth apps is exploding, few
lessons have been shared regarding the user experience design for
such innovations. Building on randomized control trial (RCTs)
studies and theory, this research focuses on the design process for
adapting aspects of an empirically informed child anxiety disorder
intervention to a smartphone platform. Thus, this work is
significant due to the domain (anxiety), the nature of the
intervention (preventative-early intervention), the use of an app to
increase protocol efficiency, and the integration of concepts from
innovative design technology (gaming, notifications, user
experience design) to improve outcomes.
Focusing on the anxiety protocol, it is important to note that
considerable strides have been made to develop evidence-based
treatment and prevention armamentaria targeting youth anxiety
with almost every protocol employing the same cognitive and
behavioral procedures (Fisak et al., 2011; Silverman et al., 2008) .

REACH for Success (REACH hereafter) is a school-based
cognitive-behavioral protocol designed for 4th and 5th graders for
the indicated prevention and early intervention of childhood
anxiety and related problems. REACH uses procedures found to
be efficacious in RCTs, including in our own 3 RCT [8][9][12];
however, there are several features that set REACH apart. Most
relevant to this paper is data suggesting that the classic design of
evidence-based prevention programs (including programs like
FRIENDS [1]) is simply not feasible or sustainable in schools
(e.g., there are too many sessions, sessions are too long, manuals
are too cumbersome and not organized for real worldimplementation, too much training is required, and preparation is
too time consuming). In contrast, REACH was created from our
evidence-based exposure-based cognitive-behavioral protocols as
a practical intervention that can build a foundation for sustainable
large-scale diffusion. That is, REACH was streamlined into 6
sessions (instead of the typical 12-15), each 20-30 minutes in
length (rather than the typical 60 to 90 minutes), and uses an easyto-follow manual (each session is condensed into one page front
and back while FRIENDS, for example, has an 89 page manual).
One concern with REACH, however, is that such a streamlined
protocol may result in a lower dosage of the active change
ingredients and fewer opportunities for youth to practice coping
skills because there are fewer sessions and less practitioner
feedback time. This concern is justified as a recent child anxiety
treatment study evaluating an 8 session adaptation of the 16 to 20
session Coping Cat program yielded lower youth response rates
suggesting that difficulty practicing the skills was a major
impediment to recovery [11].
A purpose of this research was to design an mHealth platform to
accompany the REACH 6 session school-based preventative early
intervention protocol. Specifically, the goal was to develop an
mHealth app that: (a) provides on-demand opportunities for skill
practice, (b) uses notifications relevant to skill practice to improve
compliance, (c) offers tools for personalizing and tailoring the
protocol, (d) increases opportunities for corrective feedback based
on user data amenable to creating personalized reports of youth
weekly practice and response, and (e) yields high user ratings
along core validated usability dimensions relevant to technology
innovation efforts. Herein, the REACH protocol, the app design
process, and the app implementation are described. Results from
an empirical study in a usability context are presented. To set
domain context, the face-to-face protocol is described followed by
a discussion on design, implementation, and usability.

2. THE REACH PROTOCOL
REACH for Personal and Academic Success is an indicated
prevention and early intervention program targeting anxiety
disorders and related problems in youth. The protocol is
administered in a group format (five to seven children per group).
Each session (S) in the manual is organized in terms of Overview,
Content (didactic, games), Review/Closing, and After the Session
(homework). Self-evaluation of emotion expressiveness is
embedded in every session. The protocol focuses on broad-based
exposure and problem solving skills, which have a wide reach for
the range of anxiety disorders targeted. Unique session content is
as follows. S1: Introduction (group name, rules, and
confidentiality), Learn about emotions, and Relaxation. S2-3:
Define worries, Learn cognitive self-control, and Practice
cognitive self-control (Worryheads game). S4: Define social skills
and Learn about conversation skills (starting and managing
conversations). Practice conversations (make-believe game). S5:
Learn about assertiveness and Practice assertiveness (stand-up!

game). S6: Learn to face situations and Engage in behavioral
exposures to mild-moderate anxiety-provoking situations. Core
skill acquisition and practice tools include the use of Daily
Diaries, Guided Relaxation, STOP acronym, and STIC acronym.
Relevant to the REACH app, Daily Diaries are used to facilitate
self-evaluation of emotion expressiveness. Youth self-monitor and
describe in writing the anxiety or fear provoking situations that
occurred during the week. Youth also rate using a 0-8 feelings
thermometer the severity of anxiety/fear associated with the
situation. Lastly, youth describe in writing thoughts that occurred
before/during/after the situation (e.g., worries) and actions that
resulted (e.g., avoidance behaviors). In terms of Guided
Relaxation, youth are provided with pre-recorded standardized
step-by-step procedures designed to improve self-regulation of
anxiety related physiological hyperarousal via breathing exercises,
muscle tension/release exercises, and imagery. When it comes to
cognitive self-control, a four-step coping plan is introduced via
the “STOP” acronym where S = Scared? T = Thoughts, O= Other
[thoughts], P = Praise. STOP is first practiced via the Worryheads
game by using pre-written emotionally ambiguous and anxiety
provoking scenarios along with an accompanying “worry
thought”. Youth are then asked to change the “worry thought” for
a more realistic and alternative solution to the scenario provided.
In the game, successful resolution of the worry thought results in
advances toward a common goal for each player (reaching the end
to win the game). Subsequently, with basic knowledge of STOP,
youth engage in prospectively applying the technique to situations
that emerge as anxiety or fear provoking for them during the
course of each week. Lastly, behavioral exposures are introduced
via STIC jobs (STIC = Show That I Can. STICs are provided in
the form of a pre-written or prepopulated Fear Hierarchies based
on modules from the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for
Children where each avoidance behavior has been pre-populated
for the child as individual exposures.
The REACH protocol has been implemented using a paper-andpencil approach. The protocol, while effective, encountered some
common limitations in practice, notably protocol compliance.
Specifically, subjects did not practice skills between sessions or
were not diligent in recording practice activity and outcomes.
Further, as noted in section 1, lower dosage in the related Coping
Cat tool resulted in lower response rates. Data capture with paperand-pencil methods is also time consuming and subject to human
coding errors or oversights. The psychology researchers believed
mobile and gaming technologies could effectively address the
limitations, improve compliance and data capture, thereby
reducing dosage while increasing effectiveness. They teamed with
software engineering researchers to conduct a multidisciplinary
design and development process to construct the app.

3. DESIGN PROCESS
The multidisciplinary team embarked on a highly iterative design
process focused on the capabilities and context of end users. The
researchers aspired to use a user-centered design (UCD)
approach, but in practice the designers did not have direct access
to end users during the design process and as such relied on
subject matter experts (SMEs) as proxies. The SMEs were the
psychologists who developed the REACH protocol and had
deployed it 56 times to youth over 6 months. Section 5 describes
external validation via design review by a school advisory board
and a usability study with independent youth end users (n=22).

3.1 Gap Analysis
REACH is a pre-existing protocol, so the first design activity was
to review program materials and workflow, seeking opportunities
to effectively translate existing steps, and later innovating on
smartphone-specific solutions to achieve the domain objectives
for increased dosage, engagement, and feedback (see Section 1).
To better understand the domain of the app, the SMEs shared the
provider manual of the REACH protocol to the designers and the
materials for delivering the protocol (board games, handouts,
MP3s). The manual describes how the sessions, each conducted
consecutively over the course of six weeks, employ specific
practice worksheets, information gathering forms, and interactive
exercises designed to train youth in the preventive and coping
skills. The main activities defined in the manual were Daily Diary,
Relaxation, S.T.O.P, Worryheads board game, and STICs. Table 1
summarizes the protocol component steps and highlights
challenges in porting these steps to the mobile environment.
Table 1: REACH protocol components and gap analysis
REACH

Component Description / Design Challenges

Daily Diary

Self-monitoring
engagement; daily compliance; rich data entry

Relaxation

Pre-recorded audio exercises
media porting and translation

S.T.I.C.

Behavioral exposures with adult feedback
preserving steps; rewards; feedback

S.T.O.P.
Worryheads

Self-application of cognitive self-control plan
encouraging tool engagement through positive UX
Learn and practice cognitive self-control plan with
provided scenarios
detailed alternatives; increasing dosage; feedback

A round of stakeholder interviews involving the SMEs followed
the domain research of the REACH protocol. These included
working sessions between the design team leads and the SMEs,
visits by the SMEs to the design team’s lab, and synchronous
question-answer sessions over email and videoconferencing. This
step of the process addressed difficulties relating to understanding
the protocol and assumptions on both sides regarding
implementation objectives. This step took longer than expected,
with a result of inconsistent understanding of implementation
outcomes. The design team conducted an internal review to
identify root causes and come up with design process alternatives.
The causes identified included:
1. New terminology.
2. Gaps in understanding by the design team with respect to the
protocol.
3. Assumptions of the designers based on past implementations
of mHealth apps in non-preventative domains.
4. Ad hoc communications patterns between SMEs and the
design team, and within the design team itself.
5. A lack of understanding of the end user context.
Together, these issues are not uncommon in design processes, and
some were addressed (1, 3, 4) through simple awareness of the
issue in the team review. For example, improving ad hoc
communication patterns was improved through more frequent
design team meetings, clarifying the lines of communication with
SMEs, and reiterating design team understanding of requirements
back to the SMEs for validation.

Issues #2 and #5 were more significant. Issue #2 represents a
“blind spot” in design, due to factors such as missing information
implicitly understood by the SMEs but not apparent to the design
team. Issue #5 was a recognition that the design team did not
understand who would be using the app and in what context. At
this point the design team realized a more patient-centric approach
was required to overcome these design obstacles.

3.2 A Patient-centric Design Process
The design process described in the previous section focused on
translating a field manual; it is not surprising that the translation
had gaps derived from implicit knowledge assumed by the manual
authors and not understood by the designers. The software
engineering researchers suggested a more user-centric approach,
where the needs of the end user, in this case the patients, is the
focus of the design process. The gold standard for such a design
process is User-Centered Design (UCD), originally credited to
Norman and Draper [7]. UCD assumes a participatory design
process with end users, but for this research we prefer the more
inclusive definition of UCD as “the active involvement of users
for a clear understanding of user and task requirements, iterative
design and evaluation, and a multi-disciplinary approach.” [14].
ISO 9241-210 [4] identifies 6 principles to UCD (quote):
1. The design is based upon an explicit understanding of users,
tasks and environments.
2. Users are involved throughout design and development.
3. The design is driven and refined by user-centered evaluation.
4. The process is iterative.
5. The design addresses the whole user experience.
6. The design team includes multidisciplinary skills and
perspectives.
These principles were especially attractive to the design team due
to the uniqueness of the domain and protocol, and identified
issues understanding the end user context. The team realized the
app would not be a direct translation of the paper-based REACH
protocol, and needed to focus on context and end user experience.
There is a wide range of practices supporting UCD; the design
team utilized personas, prototyping with iterative feedback,
participatory design, and end user validation. The SMEs served
as participatory designers, eliminating the back-and-forth ad hoc
aspects of the initial process. They also served as proxies for the
end users during design as gaining access to youth (4th-5th grade
users for an extended time for intense design activities was not
possible). Access to end users would have certainly been
preferable during the design process but was not possible at the
time. However end user validation was emphasized before
approving the app for protocol trial; these results are reported in
section 5. Fortunately, prior domain research and SME interviews
from the gap analysis proved useful in the context of the UCD.

3.2.1 Personas
The design team started the UCD process by developing personas,
or proxies for categories of end users, and inviting the SMEs to
review them. The SMEs were not familiar with personas, and after
overcoming initial confusion about the technique, gained
enthusiasm and effectively provided useful feedback. The
personas shared with the SMEs are presented in Table 2.
Iterating over these personas led to several design insights that
were previously not understood by the design team. For example,
the design team came to understand subjects in this domain have a
higher need for re-assurance; respond well to attention and
approval, and are highly compliant (persona 2). Discussion of the

personas with the SMEs further revealed that in community
samples girls are more likely identified as “anxious” than boys,
and anxious youth fear the evaluative nature of social situations
(personas 3 and 4). After capturing a clearer idea about end user
context through discussing the personas created with the SME, the
design team started a phase of rapid prototyping to ensure the
SMEs provided frequent feedback on each design decision.
Table 2: REACH protocol components and gap analysis
Persona 1 Jacob is 10 years old, and is currently being raised by
his single mother. He was held back for behavior
problems as he tends to lash out when stressed. When
confronted with even minor change he shuts down,
and becomes irritable. His goal is to do as little as
possible, or just enough so he doesn't get in trouble.
Persona 2 Jessie is 9 years old and very shy. In larger groups of
10 or more people she panics, and is dangerously on
edge. She has a strong recognition of her symptoms,
and works very hard at overcoming them. Her goal is
to be free from required effort as soon as possible.
Persona 3 Mike is 12 years old. He finds it difficult interact in
groups. He thinks that everyone has prying eyes on
him and judging his every move. He loves to read
books and is distracted by day dreaming. He gets very
anxious and nervous in social situations.
Persona 4 Elizabeth is 10 years old. She is relatively overweight
and is embarrassed in evaluative situations. When her
classmates tease her, she cries and withdraws from
interacting with peers. This typically happens during
physical education and school games.

3.2.2 Rapid Prototyping
Rapid prototyping is an iterative design technique refining the
details of interaction models and overall user experience. Early
prototypes, or storyboards, focus on task sequences, or the
mapping of task workflows to interface screens. This leads to user
interaction modeling; the identification of user input actions
effecting transitions between screens or for the capture of critical
information. Later iterations refine these models and also layer in
thematic elements, until a final design is converged upon.
Iterations are meant to be short, frequent, and focused on
answering specific questions regarding the user experience.

3.2.2.1 Storyboarding and Clickthrough Prototypes
The design team used the freely available Pencil prototyping tool
to construct screen and clickthrough mockups. Clickthroughs take
simple screen mockups and overlay “hot regions” that advance the
mock to a new screen, simulating a user interaction. One
drawback is the tool runs its simulations in a web browser so tap
and swipe gestures are not supported; however, the tool does
support mobile UI “skins” to promote a look-and-feel consistent
with the mobile user experience. Figure 2 shows an example of an
early mockup created for S.T.O.P. activity.
The team created mockups of different scenarios in the app. Each
mockup was peer-reviewed within the design team, validated
against the documented protocol, and then presented to the SMEs
for feedback. The design was iteratively refined until the scenario
interactions were adequately captured, and the design team felt
comfortable moving to implementation on the Android platform.

Figure 1: S.T.O.P. Mockup in Pencil

3.2.2.2 Translating Protocol Components
As identified in the gap analysis (section 3.1), some protocol
components are a fairly straightforward translation, or port, to the
mobile app, while others are not. For example, the Relaxation
audio components were a straightforward port of the media to the
device wrapped with a simple consistent interaction metaphor. Of
course this component also requires the least user interaction of
any of the components. On the contrary, the Worryheads game is
a multiplayer board game involving cards. The app required
limiting the game experience to a single user compared to the
multiplayer board game. The design team replaced the physical
cards in the board game with preset “Situations” and “Thoughts”
screens. The user was then presented with a choice of four of
“Other Thoughts” options to choose from. Once the user selects a
choice from possible options a praise message was showed on the
screen to appreciate the correct answer. Screens depicting
Worryheads are shown in section 4.
A design concern in translating the protocol was the significant
amount of text a child is asked to input during activities such as
the Daily Diary and S.T.O.P. The mobile device is not suited for
textual input that goes beyond instant messaging or social media
apps, and further the end users are at an age where they are often
mobile-aware, but not proficient mobile typists. The fear was that
textual input would be skipped or significantly limited, or in the
worst-case cause frustration of the app to the extent children
would abandon it. The design team identified speech capture input
as a means to facilitate better information capture.

3.2.3 Injecting Innovations in the Mobile Experience
A challenge in applying mHealth concepts to existing clinical
protocols is the desire to innovate versus leveraging validated
protocol steps. For this project, the mobile platform provided the
means for increasing dosage by virtue of the device being everpresent. However, ubiquity is not enough, end users must be
motivated to practice the protocol. Engagement was addressed
through innovative features introduced in the mobile platform
including thematic and age-appropriate media, game strategies
(e.g. progressive reward incentives), and mobile notifications.

3.2.3.1 Designing an Appropriate Theme
A user interface theme refers to the consistent application of
stylistic elements such as images, fonts, audio or video media, and
user interface widgets (buttons, menus, taps, etc.). To gain
acceptance of the app amongst users familiar with the paper
protocol, the design team used the same theme used in the paper
protocol. The team ensured that color codes and the fonts used in
paper based protocol and the fonts used in the app are same. To

design the features of the app, the team studied the paper-based
versions of the activities to be performed by youth to get a better
idea of how to replicate the activities in the application. The team
followed the same nomenclature of the existing activities in the
screen designs reduce confusion and gain rapid acceptance.
The user experience required a gender-neutral, age-appropriate
proxy for the human guide who assists in the existing REACH
protocol. This proxy personifies the guide, providing instruction
and feedback to the end user through the mobile interface. Initial
ideas focused on themes such as “feed your pet” or “grow your
plant” but were rejected as being either too “babyish” for the
target age range or gender-biased.
The design team came up with the idea of an animated
motivational character in the form of a blob. The design team
referred to the character as “Bob the Blob” (Figure 3), but the
male name is never used in the app itself. Based on game design
concepts, “Bob” presents an age-appropriate, gender-neutral
proxy for protocol guidance and feedback [6][8].

3.2.3.2 Progressive Reward Incentives
While one of the goals of the REACH protocol is to empower
youth to be intrinsically motivated to enact the protocol, at the
training stage it is imperative to repeat the dosage faithfully in
order to attain this intrinsic motivation. A common gamification
technique is to employ leveled rewards as an extrinsic motivator
for performing a targeted behavior. Therefore a simple
progressive (leveled) set of rewards for extrinsic motivation
included in the app design. When an end user completes a task
from the REACH protocol they get a reward in the form of Bob’s
abilities/tricks. This way the user is motivated to follow the
protocol and completing the tasks (dosage) so s/he can unlock
more complicated tricks for Bob.
One concern SMEs raised during the design process was the
potential to inadvertently punish the child for not performing a
task. Given the domain, a design invariant was specified to keep
all interactions with the child positive; therefore, all language and
emotive expressions of Bob throughout the app were scrubbed to
ensure there were no negative connotations. For progressive
rewards, a setting in the app was designed to unlock new tricks
twice every week. The presence of these tricks also served as
extrinsic motivation for engagement.

3.2.3.3 Smartphone Notifications
Mobile platforms offer an “always on” communications channel
between service providers and end users. Most categories of
mHealth apps emphasize the communications channel between
clinicians and patients, or between patients and automated big
data platforms on the cloud. This project is unique in that it does
not leverage the mobile device as a communications channel. In
this generation of the app, the focus is on leveraging the device as
an information collector and dosage vehicle for the protocol. In
this sense the device serves more as a Personal Digital Assistant
(PDA) than as a connected mobile phone.
In this modality it is still important to present to the end user a
feeling of connectedness. The personification of Bob the Blob as a
proxy guide is one way the design provides this connectedness.
As a second design concept, the design team wanted to make use
of mobile notifications, but without relying on cloud-based push
notifications as these would require a persistent network
connection. Therefore the design supports local notifications
presented to the end user in both fixed and adaptive schedules.

Fixed schedules are daily time-based notifications, such as for the
Daily Diary, to complete a regular interval task. Adaptive
notifications require tracking end user interactions with the app
and dynamically determining whether to issue a notification to
engage with Bob the Blob again. The designers are concerned
with the notion of alarm fatigue through over-notification, though
currently the mobile device is given to the end users as a locked
down tool for practicing the protocol, and not as a generalpurpose smartphone for personal use.

3.2.3.4 Security and Privacy
Any mHealth app needs to be concerned with how user data is
stored, transmitted, and identified. These concerns can become
overbearing nonfunctional requirements on the app and down to
the underlying mobile operating system providing the
communication and storage services. At this stage of the app’s
development, it made more sense to de-identify data and work in a
locked-down, disconnected mode. There were several simplifying
assumptions the design team was able to make:
1. The emphasis on increased dosage over remote monitoring of
compliance or personal health measurements puts this project
in a different class of mHealth apps. Such apps push data to
remote providers (often via a cloud-based service) and
support human or automated communication reminders.
2. The relatively small number of participants in planned early
studies meant the devices, with a specific chosen version of
the mobile operating system, could be purchased and
distributed to end users. The design team selected a Motorola
phone running Android API version 19 (KitKat).
3. The relatively small number of participants makes it easier to
de-identify the data and manage it external to the app. A
secret user interaction combined with a password protects
access to functionality that supports exporting user
interaction and task completion data (see above).
Of course these assumptions will have to change in future
generations of the platform to facilitate broader adoption. But as a
dosage augmentation platform, the design team leveraged the
weekly visits with the psychologists combined with the
computational sophistication of modern smartphone platforms to
provide a self-contained solution.

4. APP IMPLEMENTATION
The Android platform was selected to support the app. The
openness of the Android platform, the availability of low-cost
devices, the ease of the Google Speech API, and the ability to
deploy the app without the involvement of an app store were the
deciding factors for the first generation of the app. This section
briefly describes the implementation on the Android platform.
The final user interaction model combined with scheduled
interactions per protocol rules is shown in Figure 2.
This timeline in Figure 2 is based on weeks one to six of the
REACH training program. Daily Diary, as the name suggests
needs to be made available daily for all the six weeks whereas the
Worryheads needs to be made available only in third, fourth and
fifth week of the training program.

When the user selects the app from the Android home screen, a
landing page is shown allowing the user to select from 5 available
activities (see Figure 3, upper left). At any time only activities that
are available can be selected from the landing page. Further,
activities that are overdue are highlighted by a soft gold pulsing
glow around the button (not shown) to provide a further visual cue
to the end user to perform an activity.
The S.T.I.C activity is shown in the upper right in Figure 3. In this
activity end users are encouraged to do a task they would
normally avoid due to their anxiety. In the paper protocol, once a
child completes the activity s/he receives a physical stamp from
an adult (usually a teacher or parent). In the app this was
implemented as a secret code entered by the adult, who could then
provide an electronic stamp of approval.

Figure 2: REACH App intervention Timeline

Landing page

S.T.I.C.

The S.T.O.P. activity (Figure 3, mid-left) asks the child to provide
responses to a set of questions (see section 2). Each response is
stored in a SQLite database on the device. Figure 3, mid-right
shows the “O” (Other Thoughts) step of the Worryheads game.
This is basically a variant of the S.T.O.P. activity with preselected “S” and “T”s. The child has to consider the given “S” and
“T” and select an appropriate “O” and “P” to complete the
simulation. At the conclusion of these activities Bob the Blob
praises the child (Figure 3, bottom right).
The Daily Diary (Figure 3, bottom left) is a scheduled activity
available to the child each day. The activity is available during
school hours but notifications are only given after school hours.
As described in section 2, the Daily Diary asks the child to reflect
on potentially anxiety-provoking events from her/his day, and
inquires about thoughts that came to mind in that situation. Youth
also rate how s/he handled and felt about the situation. This
embedded diary is part of the organizational framework of
REACH emphasizing the need to identify and confront anxietyprovoking situations that are threatening but manageable.
In addition to the 5 protocol activities available from the landing
page, the end user also can tap directly on Bob the Blob and be
taken to a table-oriented layout of “tricks” Bob can perform. The
tricks (animations) available at any time are based on the protocol
schedule as described in section 3.2.3.2.
Additional features were provided by the app to support research
outcomes (section 2). An on-device database stores all end user
responses, and tracks each user action. The latter will be used
after trials to answer research questions such as whether alarm
fatigue occurred, or end users were not sufficiently motivated to
engage with the app. A data export feature provided only to
interventionists allows data to be offloaded as csv files.

S.T.O.P.

Worryheads

Finally, in the face-to-face protocol trial, interventionists can
personalize dosage schedules or tailor training activities during
weekly visits. To support this in the app, a hidden feature was
embedded only for the interventionist role. A specific multi-tap
sequence combined with a secret PIN unlocks this feature so
interventionists can decide if a protocol component should be
enabled/disabled or otherwise modify the planned dosage for that
week. Additional settings include selecting the start date of the
protocol, notification time windows and frequency, the schedule
trick release, changing the teacher PIN, and exporting data.

5. VALIDATION
Daily Diary

Positive Reinforcement

Figure 3: REACH App Interaction Screens

The highly iterative participatory design process described in
section 3 enabled continuous feedback during app evolution. After
completing the initial candidate release version, the design team
and psychologists conducted two types of external validation. The
first was two feedback sessions with external SMEs from a school

advisory board (SAB). The second was a usability study
conducted with actual youth end users in the schools.

5.1 Advisory Board Feedback
The SAB consisted of two school psychologists with experience
delivering REACH, and two school district administrators who
oversee student services and prevention efforts for 47 K-8
schools. Based on their experience with youth, the SAB
considered the developmental appropriateness of the design and
program tools included (e.g., during the face to face sessions,
youth wanted to utilize Relaxation and play Worryheads ondemand, so those activities were selected for inclusion in the app).
From the SAB feedback, three issues emerged:
1. Safety and security - would youth have access to texting and
Internet on the devices?
2. Cost: would parents be responsible for the devices, if lost?
3. Flexibility - would versions of the app be available for the
iPhone, smartboards, and tablets?
The first issue was addressed by adding security software
SureLock to every device. The second was addressed by applying
procedures used by the school relevant to laptop computers where
parents are financially responsible. For flexibility, it was
determined that preliminary data is necessary prior to investing in
additional versions of the technology for different devices.

5.2 Usability Study
5.2.1 Participants
With parental consent (and assent from child), 22 youth (Mean
age = 9.67 years, 12 girls, 12 Hispanic/Latino, 5 White, 1 Black, 1
Asian, 3 “other”) from public schools participated in the ‘system
usefulness, satisfaction, and ease’ aspect of this research. The
median household income was about $39,000 and most youth
were recruited from the same zip code and class grades. In
addition, 77% reported knowing how to use an Android
smartphone and 54.5% reported playing games using a
smartphone “all the time”.

5.2.2 Measures
System usefulness, satisfaction, and ease were assessed via 22items from the Usefulness, Satisfaction, and Ease of Use
Questionnaire [4] modified for children and adolescents. Youth
responded to each item using a 10-point rating scale (1= “not at
all” to 10 = “very much”). System ease of use (SYSUSE) was
measured via 11 items (e.g., it is easy to use; it is simple to use),
quality of support information (INFOQUAL) was measured via 3
items (e.g., instructions and messages are easy to understand;
messages to fix problems are clear), system ease of learning
(SYSEASE) was measured via 4 items (e.g., I easily remember
how to use it; I quickly became good at it), and system
satisfaction (SYSSATIS) was measured via 4 items (e.g., I am
happy with this app; I would tell a friend about this app).
Consistent with the original measure, alpha reliabilities were
excellent: system ease of use (α = 0.92), quality of support
information (α = 0.83), system ease of learning (α = 0.92), system
satisfaction (α = 0.88), and stigma (α = 0.81) scale scores, and
overall usability score (α = 0.95).

5.2.3 Procedures
Parents (primary caregivers, legal guardians) received a letter
from the research team describing the nature of the study and the
timeframe for participation (within the next 7 to 10 days). From
those contacted, 26% provided child consent and every child
provided assent (n=22). Youth with consent/assent provided data

at a university laboratory or at their school. At the beginning of
the study, each youth was provided with an envelope that
contained a device and a questionnaire. After receiving the study
materials, three phases (1-Listen to the Relaxation; play
Worryheads game; 2-Write a daily-dairy or S.T.O.P. entry; 3-Play
with the Blob) were implemented by trained research assistants.
For a phase, each prescribed interactions with the app was 2minutes and responding to the survey lasted about 5 minutes. At
the end, youth were thanked for their participation in the study,
which lasted a total of 20 to 30 minutes. Parents of participant
youth were provided with $15.00 at the end of the study.

5.2.4 Results
Descriptive statistics and correlations for the focal variables are
given in Table 3. There were no missing data and some variables
exceeded conventional cutoffs of |2| for skewness and |7| for
kurtosis [16]: System Ease of Use (-3.04 skewness, 10.39
kurtosis), System Ease of Learning (-2.15 skewness; 3.9 kurtosis),
and System Satisfaction (-2.23 skewness; 4.53 kurtosis).
Moreover, statistically significant Shapiro-Wilks test values were
found for these indicators and thus subsequent tests were
conducted via non-parametric approaches. Specifically,
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests were conducted to estimate any
sex (boys vs. girls) or ethnicity/race (Hispanic/Latino vs. NonHispanic/Latino) variations in terms of: system ease of use,
quality of support information, system ease of learning, and
system satisfaction. No statistically significant mean differences
were found suggesting robustness across sex and ethnicity/race.
Table 3. Usability Study Results
Mean

sd

Median

Overall Usability 35.69

19.84

38.23

1. SYSUSE

8.94

1.48

9.24

2. INFOQUAL

9.13

1.28

9.67

3. SYSEASE

8.72

2.03

9.41

4. SYSSATIS

8.90

1.70

9.75

1

2

-- .61**
--

3

4

.92**

.47*

.80**

.53*

--

.48*
--

Note: Ranges from 0 to 40 for Overall Usability, 0 to 10 for other
variables; SYSUSE = system ease of use; INFOQUAL = quality of
support information; SYSEASE = system ease of learning; SYSSATIS =
system satisfaction; *p< .05; **p< .01

Given these findings, mean estimates for the total sample were
calculated and results showed that the REACH app system was
highly and positively rated, for the most part, along the four
dimensions of interest: system ease of use, quality of support
information, system ease of learning, and system satisfaction with
means ranging from 8.72 to 9.13. Also, as shown in Table 3,
statistically significant correlations were found among the four
dimensions with correlation coefficients ranging from .47 to .80
(p < .05). Lastly, transforming SUSE-Y overall total scores into a
traditional “grade” scale, analyses showed that the REACH app
system earned an “A” grade from 55% of youth, “A-” from 14%,
“B+” from 9%, “B” from 9%, and failing grades of “C-” or less
from 13% (or 3 youth). Focusing those youth who rated the
system with a “C-” grade or less, data showed that all three youth
reported no knowledge of Android operating system. One of the
three youth did not know how to connect the earbuds to the
phone, had trouble placing earbuds in his ears, asked what he is
supposed to press during the Worryheads, asked what the word
“respond” means, and did not know what to press during the
STOP task. Another seemed “lost” during Worryheads and the
third youth was distracted by SureLock pop-ups during testing.

6. DISCUSSION
Our multidisciplinary, collaborative efforts resulted in a
smartphone app to potentiate the prevention and early intervention
of childhood anxiety disorders and related problems. To our
knowledge this is the first research-based child anxiety prevention
and early intervention app with known usability ratings. The
FRIENDS for Life Program released an app for Android, but there
is no research relevant to the technology developed. In child
anxiety treatment, SmartCAT is a promising mhealth platform for
ecological momentary intervention, used as an adjunct to the
Coping Cat treatment program [11]. The REACH prevention app
appears to be more similar than different to SmartCAT whereas
the FRIENDS app is mostly psychoeducational. Focusing on
prevention, for example, REACH and FRIENDS provide ondemand opportunities for skill practice but REACH explicitly
focuses on reducing problematic anxiety at the indicated and early
intervention level as it includes focused and direct features
relevant to engaging youths in self-monitoring, in-vivo exposures,
and cognitive self-control. In addition, REACH is capable of
deploying notifications relevant to skill practice, offers tools for
personalizing and tailoring the protocol (e.g., increase
notifications, activate new tools based on performance, activate
tools parallel to the weekly focal module), and allows for
opportunities for corrective feedback based on user data amenable
to creating personalized reports of youth weekly practice and
response. When it comes to contrasting the SmartCAT treatment
app with the REACH prevention app, both yielded high “ease of
use” ratings. Moreover, as found in this research, the REACH
prevention app yielded overall high ratings along additional
dimensions not examined for FRIENDS or SmartCAT. That is,
REACH showed high ratings for quality of support information,
system ease of learning, and system satisfaction. Also, this
research found no significant differences between boys and girls
or between Hispanic/Latino and non-Hispanic/Latino youth on
any of the usability dimensions examined.
The REACH app appears promising and has the potential to study
questions not only relevant to potentiating program response and
refining aspects of the technology, but about large scale diffusion,
personalized care, and bridging the gap in health disparities when
it comes to affective problems and its related disease outcomes.
The version of the app described in this paper was designed and
created through a multidisciplinary process that is user-centered in
the broad interpretation of the process. Our subsequent plans for
the REACH app include incorporating patients, caregivers, and
interventionists directly into the design process, and broadening
its applicability to minority populations, populations with sleep
disorders, and studying the potential for positive remedies for
negative outcomes of anxiety, notably drug abuse.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Barrett, P., and Turner, C. 2001. Prevention of anxiety
symptoms in primary school children: preliminary results
from a universal school-based trial. Br J Clin Psychol, 40(Pt
4), 399-410.

[4] International Organization for Standardization, 2008.
Ergonomics of human system interaction-Part 210: Humancentred design for interactive systems (formerly known as
13407).
[5] Lund, M. 2001. Measuring usability with the USE
questionnaire.
http://ww2.stcsig.org/usability/newsletter/0110_measuring_
with_use.html
[6] Murray, T., Hardy, D., Spruijt-Metz, D., Hekler, E., and Raij,
A. 2013. Avatar interfaces for biobehavioral
feedback. Design, User Experience, and Usability. Health,
Learning, Playing, Cultural, and Cross-Cultural User
Experience Berlin Heidelberg: Springer
[7] Norman, D. A., and Draper, S. W. 1986. User-Centered
System Design: New Perspectives on Human Computer
Interacti. Hillsdale N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[8] Pina, A. A., Silverman, W. K., Fuentes, R. M., Kurtines, W.
M., and Weems, C. F. 2003. Exposure-based cognitivebehavioral treatment for phobic and anxiety disorders:
Treatment effects and maintenance for Hispanic/Latino
relative to European-American youths. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 42(10), 1179-1187.
[9] Pina, A. A., Zerr, A. A., Villalta, I. K., and Gonzales, N. A.
(2012). Indicated prevention and early intervention for
childhood anxiety: A randomized trial with Caucasian and
Hispanic/Latino youth. Journal of consulting and clinical
psychology, 80(5), 940.
[10] Pinto, M. D., Greenblatt, A. M., Hickman, R. L., Rice, H.
M., Thomas, T. L., and Clochesy, J. M. 2015. Assessing the
Critical Parameters of eSMART-MH: A Promising AvatarBased Digital Therapeutic Intervention to Reduce Depressive
Symptoms. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care, n/a-n/a.
[11] Pramana, G., Parmanto, B., Kendall, P. C., and Silk, J. S.
2014. The SmartCAT: An m- Health Platform for Ecological
Momentary Intervention in Child Anxiety Treatment.
Telemedicine and E-Health, 20(5), 419-427.
[12] Silverman, W. K., Kurtines, W. M., Jaccard, J., and Pina, A.
A. (2009). Directionality of change in youth anxiety
treatment involving parents: an initial examination. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(3), 474.
[13] Silverman, W. K., Pina, A. A., and Viswesvaran, C. 2008.
Evidence-based psychosocial treatments for phobic and
anxiety disorders in children and adolescents. J Clin Child
Adolesc Psychol, 37(1), 105-130.
[14] Vredenburg, K., Mao, J., Smith, P. W., and Carey, T. 2002. A
Survey of User-Centered design Practice. Paper presented at
the Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Symposium on ComputerHuman Interaction (CHI 2002), Minneapolis, MN, April
2002., Minneapolis, MN.

[2] Chavira, D. A., Stein, M. B., Bailey, K., and Stein, M. T.
2003. Parental opinions regarding treatment for social
anxiety disorder in youth. J Dev Behav Pediatr, 24(5), 315322.

[15] Wang, J. T., Wang, Y. Y., Wei, C. L., Yao, N. L., Yuan, A.,
Shan, Y. Y., and Yuan, C. R. 2014. Smartphone
Interventions for Long-Term Health Management of Chronic
Diseases: An Integrative Review. Telemedicine and EHealth, 20(6), 570-583.

[3] Fisak, B. J., Richard, D., and Mann, A. 2011. The prevention
of child and adolescent anxiety: a meta-analytic review. Prev
Sci, 12(3), 255-268.

[16] West, S. G., Finch, J. F., and Curran, P. J. 1995. Structural
equation models with nonnormal variables: Problems and
remedies.

