CAPTURE - Cooperatively Applied Positioning Techniques
Utilizing Range Extensions

Item type

Article

Authors

Cullen, Gary

Publisher

IEEE

Downloaded

20-Dec-2016 14:11:14

Item License

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Link to item

http://hdl.handle.net/10759/325964

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014

CAPTURE - Cooperatively Applied Positioning
Techniques Utilizing Range Extensions
Gary Cullen, Kevin Curran, Jose Santos

Gearoid Maguire, Denis Bourne

Intelligent Systems Research Centre,
University of Ulster, Magee College,
Derry, United Kingdom
Gary.Cullen@lyit.ie

Letterkenny Institute of Technology,
Co. Donegal, Ireland

Abstract— The most commonly implemented Indoor Location
Based Solution uses existing Wi-Fi network components to locate
devices within its range. While this technique offers obvious
economic rewards by utilizing a preinstalled infrastructure, these
network topologies were typically designed to provide network
coverage to mobile devices rather than deliver an Indoor
Location Based Solution. Large areas without coverage are
common in these networks because network designers were not
typically concerned about providing 100% coverage for mobile
data. Hallways, toilet areas or other general purpose areas that
ordinarily would not require network coverage did not get
dedicated WAPs installed. Transient users navigating these areas
of the network were un-locatable using this infrastructure.
Furthermore the indoor arena is an especially noisy atmosphere,
being home to other wireless devices such as Bluetooth Headsets,
Cordless Phones and Microwave Ovens. Considering users spend
more time in an indoor environment, over 88%, the need for a
solution is obvious. Therefore, we propose a solution to resolve
the issue of restricted coverage of Indoor Location Based
solutions, using a cooperative localization technique Cooperatively Applied Positioning Techniques Utilizing Range
Extension (CAPTURE). CAPTURE offers a method of locating
devices that are beyond the range of the current in-house location
based solution. It presents a unique contribution to research in
this field by offering the ability to utilize devices that know their
location within a Location Based Solution (LBS), to evaluate the
position of unknown devices beyond the range capacity of the
LBS. This effectively extends the locating distances of an Indoor
LBS by utilizing the existing mobile infrastructure without the
need for any additional hardware. The proliferation of smart
phones and the tablet form factor, bundled with Wi-Fi, Bluetooth
and gyroscopes – technologies currently used to track position,
provide a fertile community for CAPTURE to cooperatively
deliver a location solution.
Keywords — Localisation; Indoor positioning;
localisation; geographical positioning; wireless.

I.

Indoor

Introduction

On loosing something or forgetting where you last placed
something, a common piece of advice is to retrace your steps
back in your mind. This can be quite a formidable task given
the multimodal transport available today coupled with the
complexity and scale of buildings we interact with on a
regular basis. The ability to place an avatar of yourself onto a
map to graphically retrace your steps in real-time would
dramatically reduce the brain power required to remember

everywhere you were at a given time. Googles manoeuvring
into the indoor location mappings realm [1] opens up the
opportunity to deliver this virtual reality, currently being able
to provide door to door route planning. Being able to navigate
your way from your office desk out through your company’s
building (taking the stairwell to avoid your boss in the lift) is
eminently achievable albeit with a small number of locations
on a modern smartphone using google maps. A level switcher
allows you to onion slice through multiple floor level plans,
before switching to GPS to offer possible transport
alternatives through the outdoor environment. On reaching
what ‘historically’ would have been your destination, Google
Indoor Maps and more importantly an Indoor Positioning
System (IPS) picks up where GPS left off offering a point to
point navigation solution. This can then take you through the
complexities of an airport terminal for example, via specific
waypoints such as security and check-in desks directly to your
departure gate.
One of the barriers to implementation of such a concept is
the limitation in coverage and accuracy of currently
implemented Indoor Position or Location Based Systems [2].
IPSs typically utilize pre-existing Wi-Fi network infrastructure
taking ranging information from Wireless Access Points
(WAP’s) as inputs for a localization algorithm. Unfortunately
the drivers behind the strategic decisions on the positioning of
WAPs, in a Wi-Fi based solution, were typically to catch large
congregations of users and primarily to provide the highest
available throughput to those users. Coverage for IPSs is not
necessarily to the forefront of network designer’s minds when
designing such networks, leaving large areas beyond the range
of an IPS. GPS on the other hand, offers near global coverage,
bar some issues with urban canyons and other high rise natural
obstacles that prevent Line of Sight (LoS) to the just under 30
satellites required [3] to deliver such wide scope.
The indoor environment does not afford such clear
unobstructed views to and from tracking devices, the many
doors, walls, floors, pillars and ceilings hinder the capacity of
an IPS to locate devices. Furthermore the indoor arena is an
especially noisy atmosphere, being home to other wireless
devices such as Bluetooth Headsets, Cordless Phones and
Microwave Ovens. All of these devices operate in the same
frequency band as the Wi-Fi solution, namely 2.4 GHz and
therefore can interfere with the reception of signals used to
locate [2], making them behave in an unpredictable fashion.

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014
These environmental dynamics combine to dramatically affect
the ability of an indoor solution to provide an acceptable level
of coverage. Literature from Yang [4] and Rowe [5] reflect
that Location Awareness is rapidly becoming a fundamental
requirement for mobile application development. This
highlights the challenges posed for ubiquitous localization of
devices in the indoor arena. Considering users spend more
time in an indoor environment, over 88.9% according to a
recent Canadian study [6] , the need for a solution is obvious.
We propose a solution to this issue of coverage limitations by
using a cooperative localization technique, CAPTURE.
CAPTURE can plug into an in situ solution irrespective of the
technology or location technique that solution currently uses
to locate. It provides a location relative to the devices locating
it, which can then be mapped onto a global overview of the
Location Based System (LBS), assisting in the aforementioned
scenario to get you to the departure gate in a point to point
navigation solution.
Consider the following scenario where a user ‘Bob’, is in
his favorite seat in the library, unfortunately the seat is in the
far corner of the library, which can only be ‘seen’ by one
Wireless Access Point. In this position Bob’s tablet can gain
Wi-Fi access through this Access Point to allow him access to
online resources. However one Access Point is not enough for
the in-house Location Based System to accurately locate Bob

within the building using Trilateration positioning techniques.
Sue is sitting near the front of the library and can be ‘seen’ by
4 Wireless Access Points, and is thereby accurately located on
the Location Based System. She is also 25 meters to the left of
Bob and the Wireless Network Card on her Laptop can see
Bob’s tablet. The Librarian is stacking books on the shelves
behind where Bob is sitting and her smartphone is currently
located within the Location Based System also. The wireless
NIC on her smartphone can also ‘see’ Bob’s tablet, therefore,
in a normal scenario, Bob would be beyond the range of the
Location Based System, but because CAPTURE can use the
known positions of the Librarian and Sue and Bob’s position
relative to them it can accurately estimate Bob’s position
within the library.
The rest of this paper is laid out as follows; Section II
describes the system model used to implement CAPTURE.
Section III provides an overview of the experimental test bed
used to evaluate the solution and Section IV documents the
data collected during test. In Section V we describe the
findings of the experiments that were carried out validating the
feasibility of the system, the penultimate section, Section VI
outlines the proposed implementation of CAPTURE and the
paper closes with a conclusion in Section VII, providing an
insight into some projected future work with CAPTURE.

Figure 1: An Danlann Sports Hall LyIT

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014

II. CAPTURE - System Model
This section describes a system model that can be used in a
localization solution to establish the Cartesian coordinate
values of a lost device within a two dimensional plane.
CAPTURE does not require a preceding calibration stage or a
site survey, providing a robust opportunistic solution in
dynamic environments, using only real time RSSI values
without changing the IEEE 802.11 network. Literature within
the realm of Location Based Systems frequently use terms
such as Anchor or Anchor Nodes to describe devices that help
to determine the position of lost or unknown devices. The term
anchor elicits a perception of a static or permanent device,
which in a cooperative solution these devices most certainly
are not. For this reason we will use the term reference device
when describing devices that assist in the positioning of lost or
unknown devices.
Two key components typically make up the estimation of
the position of a lost device. First of all ranging techniques are
used to estimate the distance from the transmitting device(s) to
the receiving device(s). This is calculated using a metric for
example the length of time it takes a signal to propagate the
distance from the transmitter to the receiver. The second
component is the position estimation technique, here the
ranging variables are calculated using one or more ranging
techniques and these are used as input for an estimation
algorithm (mathematical formulae) to calculate the position of
the lost device.
A. RSSI – Received Signal Strength Indicator
Possibly the most popular ranging technique used in
Indoor Localization, Received Signal Strength Indicator
(RSSI) is a measurement of the voltage that exists in a
transmitted radio signal, which is an indication of the power
being received by the antenna. When a signal first leaves a
transmitting device, the power of the signal drops or
attenuates, this is true of both wired and wireless
transmissions. As a radio signal propagates through the air
some of its power is absorbed and the signal loses a specific
amount of its strength, therefore, the higher the RSSI value (or
least negative in some devices), the stronger the signal.
Knowing the amount of signal loss over a given distance
provides a method to calculate the distance from a transmitting
device, given a Received Signal Strength. At its most basic
level this allows for the ‘coarse’ localization or as referred to
in other literature, ‘presence-based localization’ [7] of a device
relative to the transmitting device. This can be illustrated by
the RSSI calculated distance being the radius of a circle and
the ‘searching’ device being at the center of that circle. The
estimated position of the lost device is anywhere on the
circumference of that circle. In an IEEE 802.11 network if the
locations of the Access Points are already known, then the
location of Mobile Devices traversing the network can be
located relative to them, albeit only to the circumference of the
radius of the calculated distance. Further localization
algorithms and position estimation filtering techniques must
be applied to provide a more precise level of localization.

In a cooperative paradigm, mobile devices can simulate the
role carried out by Access Points providing a relative
reference to a lost devices location. RSSI values can be
extracted from beacons transmitted between devices within
range. Correlation of these signal indicators and distance can
be estimated using many of the methods already applied
throughout literature in this arena [8-11]. RSSI based or more
broadly speaking, Wi-Fi based Indoor Positioning Systems
have had notoriously irregular environment variables such as
reflection, refraction, diffraction and absorption of radio
waves that can impact positioning estimated dramatically [12].
Although RSSI is a measure of signal loss, it is not a linear
representation of how many dBm is actually reaching the card.
If a signal indicator is reading -72, this means that it is 72
dBm less powerful by the time it gets to your device.
Experimental test carried out at an early stage with CAPTURE
further extoled this assumption. Results of these tests can be
viewed in Table 1: 5 meter increments in Section V, Data
Collection and Presentation. Crudely extracting the RSSI at
given distance increments to attempt to derive a meter distance
being equal to a given dBm increase in RSSI reading was not
going to yield any value worth using in any further
experiments. The authors in [13] advocate a solution utilizing
a RSSI smoothing algorithm to minimize the dynamic
fluctuation of the RSSI values.
B. Trilateration
Trilateration is a key component of GPS position
estimation techniques. It is a process that can estimate the
position of a mobile device given the positions of at least three
other objects and the distance from those objects to the device
to be located. In the scenario depicted below in Figure 2(a),
illustrated using a cooperative localization example, the circle
depicts the distance from a reference device to a lost device.
This distance would have been derived using the RSSI value
between the reference and lost devices. All we can say about
the whereabouts of the lost device is that it resides somewhere
on the circumference of the circle that is constructed using the
radius of the estimated measurement between the two devices.
A second reference device will allow the position of the lost
device to be narrowed further as can be seen in Figure 2(b).
Now the ranging estimates of the lost device have been
calculated relative to the second reference device also.
Therefore considering the lost device must be on the
circumference of the circles created by the distance between it
and the two reference devices there are only 2 possible
positions where it might be, the intersections of these two
circles.

Figure 2 (a) Single Distance

(b) With 2nd Reference Device

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014
To calculate the exact position of the lost device we need a
third reference device. When we calculate the distance from
this final reference device to the lost device and considering
we already know the distance from the other reference
devices. We can then determine that the lost device can only
be at one specific position to match those three particular
distance estimations – the intersections of the three circles (see
Figure 3). The ranging estimates calculated from the RSSI
values in the tests were used as the inputs for the trilateration
algorithm on the CAPTURE, to provide an estimate on the
position of the lost phones.

Each phone used in the test is given a name (BSSID)
TestPhone1, TestPhone2 for example. CAPTURE reads the
RSSI of all available reference points, i.e. all devices it can
‘see’, but it filters out only the test phones selected by the user
carrying out the tests. This can be seen in the image in figure 5,
and is achieved via a lookup table mapping the MAC address
of the phone to the phone name. This allows the use of only a
specified phone or a group of phones during any given test.

Figure 3: Trilateration Example
II.

Experimental Test Bed

In this section, we will provide evidence showing the
suitability of CAPTURE as a solution to the indoor ranging
problem. To do that we carried out a large campaign of
measurements in the An Danlann Sports Hall in Letterkenny
Institute of Technology illustrated in figure 1. The hall offers a
40m diagonal testing range, providing Line of Sight
measurements for all tests, as can be seen in the picture
depicted in figure 4. When readings were been recorded all
users vacated the hall, this provided an optimal environment to
use as a benchmark for future tests on CAPTURE.

Figure 4: Test Environment

Figure 5: CAPTURE Client Interface
A. System Components
The experimental setup of the prototype consisted of the
following system components:


Mobile Devices

5 Samsung GT-S5310 Galaxy Pocket phones, running
Google Android 2.2.1 on a 600 MHz ARMv6, Adreno 200
GPU, Qualcomm MSM7227 chipset, were used to carry out
the evaluation of the CAPTURE system. 4 of the phones were
used as reference devices, the other phone acted as the lost
device. All phones used during the test were of an exact make
and model so as to rule out any issues with varied RSSI reads
with different antenna types, some of these issues have been
described in the literature [14, 15]. Lisheng et al., [15] go so
far as to discribe the distortion being as much as 11.2 dBm out
with different antenna types over a 25 meter read range.
During the tests all phones were place at a distance of 80cm
above floor level, to mimic as close to a real world example of
a user holding them. The phones were placed on identical
platforms during the tests to negate the impact of Hand-Grip
body-loss effect which can also impact ranging measurements
as documented in litrature by Rosa et al., [16]. Kaemarungsi
and Krishnamurthy highlighted in their litrature [17] that
device orientation can also introduce errors when calculating
signal range estimates, so all phones had the same orientation
when used in our tests.

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014


Database

A MySQL Server version: 5.0.96 hosted on a Linux
platform was used to store all data collected by the devices.
The server was online and the phones wrote directly to it as
they recorded RSSI values from each other. The data was then
passed through a low level filter to remove any outliers, before
an average RSSI reading was calculated for each required
ranging measurement, to be used in the trilateration algorithm
to estimate the position of the lost device.


the algorithm, these were smoothed with a filter before the
average was calculated.

Laptop

A Dell Latitude E6440 iCore3 running Windows 7
Professional was used to develop the app to gather the RSSI
from the phones. An algorithm was designed to convert this
RSSI reading into a ranging measurement before a trilateration
algorithm converted the ranging measurements into Cartesian
coordinate values. We used the Eclipse IDE and Android
Software Development Kit (SDK) for Android development
and debugging, to develop the app.
B. Ranging Measurement Estimation
The RSSI values captured from the beacons transmitted by
devices within range of the ‘lost device’ were used to estimate
the relative distance between them. As explained earlier RSSI
values do not provide a linear representation of distance. The
authors in [13] advocate using the formula in “(1),” below to
estimate RSSI, and thereby extrapolate distance given RSSI:
Where:

RSSI = - (10n Log10 (d) +A)

Equation (1)

n: Path Loss Exponent
d: Distance from transmitting device
A: Received signal strength at 1 meter distance
The path loss exponent typically varies from 1.5 to 4, with
1.5 representing a free-space Line of Sight (LoS) value and 4
representing an environment that incorporates a high level of
signal attenuation. Not having a good equation modeling the
environment in which your experiments are to be deployed,
will be reflected in horrible results. After initial pre-tests were
evaluated, a Path Loss Exponent of 1.5 was determined for the
test environment, because of the open plan design of the Hall
offering LoS between all devices and the RSSI at 1 meter was
measured at -43.6316. The results of the collected data are
illustrated in the following section.
III.

Data Collection and
Presentation

Here we present all of the data collated throughout this
work, the data sets are illustrated in the graphs and tables.
During the recording of data the hall was emptied of people so
as to provide a clean set of results. An initial test was run to
establish the 1 meter range for input into the algorithm in
equation 1, the results of this test can be seen in figure 6.
Over 500 readings were recorded at various locations
throughout the hall, to accurately obtain the meter value for

Figure 6: Meter RSSI values
Further tests were then carried out to measure the accuracy
of both the RSSI values received and the resulting range
estimations from the algorithm. Table 1 below, depicts the
results of tests to capture the RSSI values between two phones
at 5 meter increments diagonally across the hall. It highlights
the RSSI value beginning at -52.48 for the 0-5 meter range. A
sample set of 200 readings was recorded per section, an
average was then taken from this set. The standard deviation
was also documented to illustrate any fluctuations in the
received values, typically these were found to be low during
our tests.
Distance
Average
Std Dev
Estimate
Distance
Average
Std Dev
Estimate

0-5m
-57.264
0.4996
4.517
0 - 25 m
-68.38
0.6884
21.544

0 - 10 m
-61.5652
0.4
8.269
0 - 30 m
-70.75
0.9797
30.059

0 - 15 m
-69.5263
0.85346
25.31
0 - 35 m
-71.854
0.6803
35.104

0 - 20 m
-67.5662
0.48332
19.216
0 - 40 m
-73.681
0.7901
45.379

Table 1: 5 meter increments
The average was then inputted into the algorithm to derive a
range estimate based on the RSSI values received. As
mentioned before RSSI values do not provide a linear
representation of measurement, and therefore some of the
increments do not initially seem like they could assist in
finding a distance at a given measurement. The trilateration
algorithm accounts for an error bounds of 2.5 meters in the
range estimation of the RSSI value. One notable issue with the
recorded RSSI values was the reading taken at the 0-1 meter
distance however. It jumped dramatically at this distance,
giving a RSSI value higher than the 0-20 and 0-25 meter tests.
This test (0-10 meters) was carried out at different areas of the
hall, to try and rule out signal interference. But irrespective of
which location the reading were taken the RSSI value was

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014
always higher (or more negative) than the next 3 larger tests.
No reason could be given at the time of writing for this
anomaly within the set.
IV.

Experimental Results

Figure 7 depicts one of the tests were CAPTURE accurately
locates a lost phone within 2.5 meters. TestPhone1,
TestPhone2 and TesPhone3 know their location, via the inhouse IPS. They also know the distance between themselves
(TestPhone1 - TestPhone2 = 15 meters, TestPhone1 –
TestPhone3 = 13 meters and TestPhone2 – TestPhone3 = 17
meters), the RSSI readings from the Lost Phone to TestPhone1
is -61.5551dBm, from the Lost Phone to TestPhone2 is 65.34534 dBm and from the Lost Phone to TestPhone3 is 61.8952dBm. These RSSI readings translate to a ranging
estimate of 13.345, 15.1221 and 9.349 meters respectively
when put through the ranging algorithm. The actual distance
between TestPhone1 and the lost phone is 11.5 meters,
between TestPhone2 and the lost phone is 13.2 meters and
TestPhone3 and the Lost Phone is 11.96 giving an
approximate error rate of 2.5 meters.

V.

CAPTURE – System
Implementation

In order for CAPTURE to be able to cooperatively locate a
lost device within a network, there must be at least 3 reference
devices within sight of the lost device. Each of these must
have ‘a prior’ knowledge of their location within a preexisting localization solution.
The hypothesis of CAPTURE was to extend the range of
in-house IPS’s, and tests shown have proven that it can
achieve exactly this. Existing IPS’s have dramatically more
powerful infrastructure than what CAPTURE would utilize
though. For example 230 volt AC powered Access Points in a
standard IPS versus 12 volt DC powered mobile reference
devices (smart phones, tablets and\or laptops) in a cooperative
solution. It would be naive to think that accuracy levels of an
in-house IPS would also ‘extend’ to a cooperative model,
although this does not take away from the solution to the range
issue that CAPTURE provides. The implementation of a more
comprehensive filter would nonetheless assist with accuracy
the Kalman or Extended Kalman Filters are recommended in
the following literature [18, 19].
VI.

Conclusion

This paper introduces CAPTURE a cooperative
localization system that provides a solution to the problem of
devices being out of range of a hosted Indoor Positioning
System. Experiments with the CAPTURE system have
demonstrated that utilizing a cooperative framework of mobile
devices can extend the range of an in situ Indoor Positioning
System by at least the range of the outermost devices located
within the system.

Figure 7: Finding Lost Phone

Some issues arose during testing for example the 0-10
meter readings, and this necessitates further work. A more
comprehensive algorithm would provide more accuracy for
the system. An expansion of CAPTURE to avail of Bluetooth
4.0 would allow for the extension of an IPS incorporating
some of the advantages of this technology. Bluetooth has been
used as a cooperative solution to the accuracy issue in IPS’s
and can be seen in the following literature [20, 21]. Further
investigation into the incorporation and evaluation of Wi-Fi
Direct as a solution is also warranted.

2014 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 27th-30th October 2014
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

M. Aly and J. Y. Bouguet, "Street view goes
indoors: Automatic pose estimation from
uncalibrated unordered spherical panoramas," in
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2012
IEEE Workshop on, 2012, pp. 1-8.
G. Cullen, K. Curran, and J. Santos,
"Cooperatively extending the range of Indoor
Localisation," in Signals and Systems Conference
(ISSC 2013), 24th IET Irish, 2013, pp. 1-8.
G. M. Djuknic and R. E. Richton, "Geolocation
and assisted GPS," Computer, vol. 34, pp. 123-125,
2001.
Y. Fan and A. Dong, "A Solution of Ubiquitous
Location Based on GPS and Wi-Fi ULGW," in
Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 2009. HIS '09. Ninth
International Conference on, 2009, pp. 260-263.
A. Rowe, Z. Starr, and R. Rajkumar, "Using microclimate sensing to enhance RF localization in
assisted living environments," in Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, 2007. ISIC. IEEE International
Conference on, 2007, pp. 3668-3675.
C. J. Matz, D. M. Stieb, K. Davis, M. Egyed, A.
Rose, B. Chou, et al., "Effects of Age, Season,
Gender and Urban-Rural Status on Time-Activity:
Canadian Human Activity Pattern Survey 2
(CHAPS
2),"
International
journal
of
environmental research and public health, vol. 11,
pp. 2108-2124, 2014.
A. E. Kosba, A. Saeed, and M. Youssef, "Robust
WLAN Device-free Passive motion detection," in
Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), 2012 IEEE, 2012, pp. 32843289.
X. Yaqian, L. Sian Lun, R. Kusber, and K. David,
"An experimental investigation of indoor
localization by unsupervised Wi-Fi signal
clustering," in Future Network & Mobile Summit
(FutureNetw), 2012, 2012, pp. 1-10.
S. Shioda and K. Shimamura, "Anchor-free
localization: Estimation of relative locations of
sensors," in Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications (PIMRC), 2013 IEEE 24th
International Symposium on, 2013, pp. 2087-2092.
M. O. Gani, C. Obrien, S. I. Ahamed, and R. O.
Smith, "RSSI Based Indoor Localization for
Smartphone Using Fixed and Mobile Wireless
Node," in Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC), 2013 IEEE 37th Annual,
2013, pp. 110-117.
D. Gualda, J. Urena, J. C. Garcia, E. Garcia, and D.
Ruiz, "RSSI distance estimation based on Genetic
Programming," in Indoor Positioning and Indoor
Navigation (IPIN), 2013 International Conference
on, 2013, pp. 1-8.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

L. Erin-Ee-Lin and C. Wan-Young, "Enhanced
RSSI-Based Real-Time User Location Tracking
System for Indoor and Outdoor Environments," in
Convergence Information Technology, 2007.
International Conference on, 2007, pp. 1213-1218.
J. Joonyoung, K. Dongoh, and B. Changseok,
"Automatic WBAN area recognition using P2P
signal strength in office environment," in Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT), 2014 16th
International Conference on, 2014, pp. 282-285.
X. Lisheng, Y. Feifei, J. Yuqi, Z. Lei, F. Cong, and
B. Nan, "Variation of Received Signal Strength in
Wireless Sensor Network," in Advanced Computer
Control (ICACC), 2011 3rd International
Conference on, 2011, pp. 151-154.
F. D. Rosa, X. Li, J. Nurmi, M. Pelosi, C.
Laoudias, and A. Terrezza, "Hand-grip and bodyloss impact on RSS measurements for localization
of mass market devices," in Localization and GNSS
(ICL-GNSS), 2011 International Conference on,
2011, pp. 58-63.
K. Kaemarungsi and P. Krishnamurthy, "Properties
of indoor received signal strength for WLAN
location fingerprinting," in Mobile and Ubiquitous
Systems: Networking and Services, 2004.
MOBIQUITOUS 2004. The First Annual
International Conference on, 2004, pp. 14-23.
K. Alexis, C. Papachristos, G. Nikolakopoulos, and
A. Tzes, "Model predictive quadrotor indoor
position control," in Control & Automation (MED),
2011 19th Mediterranean Conference on, 2011, pp.
1247-1252.
S. S. Saad and Z. S. Nakad, "A Standalone RFID
Indoor Positioning System Using Passive Tags,"
Industrial Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol.
58, pp. 1961-1970, 2011.
A. Baniukevic, D. Sabonis, C. S. Jensen, and L.
Hua, "Improving Wi-Fi Based Indoor Positioning
Using Bluetooth Add-Ons," in Mobile Data
Management
(MDM),
2011
12th
IEEE
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 246-255.
Z. Zhichao and C. Guohong, "APPLAUS: A
Privacy-Preserving Location Proof Updating
System for location-based services," in INFOCOM,
2011 Proceedings IEEE, 2011, pp. 1889-1897.

