Human Computation and Crowdsourcing: Works in Progress Abstracts:
An Adjunct to the Proceedings of the Third AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing

Acquiring Planning Knowledge via Crowdsourcing
Jie Gaoa and Hankz Hankui Zhuob and Subbarao Kambhampatic and Lei Lib
a
Zhuhai college,
Jilin Univ., Zhuhai, China
jiegao26@163.com

b

School of Data & Computer Sci.,
Sun Yat-sen Univ., China
{lnslilei,zhuohank}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Introduction

c

Dept. of Computer Sci. & Eng.,
Arizona State Univ., US
rao@asu.edu

initial states and action models based on the answers to HITs
given by the crowd. We then feed the reﬁned initial states and
action models to planners to solve the problem.

Plan synthesis often requires complete domain models and
initial states as input. In many real world applications, it is
difﬁcult to build domain models and provide complete initial state beforehand. In this paper we propose to turn to the
crowd for help before planning. We assume there are annotators available to provide information needed for building
domain models and initial states. However, there might be a
substantial amount of discrepancy within the inputs from the
crowd. It is thus challenging to address the planning problem
with possibly noisy information provided by the crowd. We
address the problem by two phases. We ﬁrst build a set of
Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs), and collect values from
the crowd. We then estimate the actual values of variables
and feed the values to a planner to solve the problem.
In contrast to previous efforts (Zhang et al. 2012;
Manikonda et al. 2014) that ask the crowd to do planning,
we exploit knowledge about initial states and/or action models from the crowd and feed the knowledge to planners to
do planning. We call our approach PAN-CROWD, stands for
Planning by Acquiring kNowledge from the CROWD.

Building HITs for Action Models: For this part, we build
on our work with the CAMA system (Zhuo 2015). We enumerate all possible preconditions and effects for each action.
Speciﬁcally, we generate actions’ preconditions and effects
as follows (Zhuo and Yang 2014). If the parameters of predicate p, denoted by Para(p), are included by the parameters
of action a, denoted by Para(a), i.e., Para(p) ⊆ Para(a), p is
likely a precondition, or an add effect, or a delete effect of a.
We therefore generate three new proposition variables “p ∈
Pre(a)”, “p ∈ Add(a)” and “p ∈ Del(a)”, the set of which
is denoted by Hpre = {p ∈ Pre(a)|∀p ∈ P and ∀a ∈ A},
Hadd = {p ∈ Add(a)|∀p ∈ P and ∀a ∈ A}, Hdel = {p ∈
Del(a)|∀p ∈ P and ∀a ∈ A}, respectively. We put all the
proposition variables together and estimate the label of each
variable by querying the crowd or annotators.
For each proposition in H, we build a Human Intelligent
Task (HIT) in the form of a short survey. For example, for
the proposition “(ontable ?x) ∈ Pre(pickup)”, we generate
a survey as shown below: Is the fact that “x is on table”
a precondition of picking up the block x? There are three
possible responses, i.e., Yes, No, Cannot tell, out of which
an annotator has to choose exactly one. Each annotator is
allowed to annotate a given survey once. Note that the set of
proposition variables H will not be large, since all predicates
and actions are in the “variable” form rather than instantiated
form, and we only consider predicates whose parameters
are included by actions. For example, for the blocks domain,
there are only 78 proposition variables in H.

The Formulation of Our Planning Problem
We formulate our planning problem as a quadruple P =
s˜0 , g, O, Ā, where s˜0 is an incomplete initial state which
is composed of a set of open propositions. A proposition is
called open if there exist variables in the parameter list of
the proposition, e.g., “on(A, ?x)” (a symbol preceded by “?”
denotes a variable that can be instantiated by an object) is an
open proposition since ?x is a variable in the parameter list
of proposition on. An open initial state can be incomplete,
i.e., some propositions are missing. The set of variables in
s˜0 is denoted by V. O is a set of objects that can be selected
and assigned to variables in V. We assume O can be easily
collected based on historical applications. Ā is a set of incomplete STRIPS action models. ā ∈ Ā is called “incomplete”
if there are some predicates missing in the preconditions or
effects of ā. A solution to the problem is a plan and a set of
“reﬁned” action models.

Building HITs for Initial States: To generate surveys that
are as simple as possible, we assume there are sets of objects
known to our approach, each of which corresponds to a type.
For example, {A, B, C} is a set of objects with type “Block”
in the blocks domain, i.e., there are three blocks known to our
approach. We can thus generate a set of possible propositions
S with the sets of objects and predicates of a domain. For
each proposition, we formulate the Human Intelligent Task
(HIT) as a short survey, the set of which is denoted by H.
To reduce the number of HITs, we start from the goal g, we
search for the action whose add effects match with g, and
update g to be an internal state by deleting add effects and
adding preconditions of the action into g. We then check

The PAN-CROWD approach
To acquire planning knowledge from the crowd, we ﬁrst build
HITs for action models and initial states, and then reﬁne
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6

base on a ratio α, resulting in open problems P . Propositions
were then changed to short surveys in natural language. We
performed extensive simulations using 20 simulated annotators to complete the human intelligent tasks (HITs). We
deﬁne the accuracy of our approach by comparing to groundtruth solutions (generated by simulators). In other words, we
solve all 150 problems using our approach, and compare the
150 solutions to ground-truth solutions, viewing the ratio of
identical solutions over 150 as the accuracy.
We ran our PAN-CROWD algorithm on testing problems by varying from 0.1 to 0.5 the ratio α, setting the number of objects to be
10. The result is shown in Figure 1.
From Figure 1, we can see that the
accuracy generally becomes lower
Figure 1: The accuwhen the ratio increases in all three
racy w.r.t. ratio α.
testing domains. This is consistent
with our intuition, since the larger the ratio is, the more
uncertain the information that is introduced to the original
planning problem when using crowdsourcing. However, from
the curves we can see the accuracies are no less than 70%
when the ratio is smaller than 0.3.

whether open initial state matches with internal state. Secondly, from the matched internal state, we select those with
unknown variables, and choose them with the same variables
to build a set of propositions with unknown variables, which
is ﬁnally transformed into a set of HITs.
Estimating True Labels Assume there are R annotators
and N tasks with binary labels {1, 0}. The true labels of
tasks are denoted by Z = {zi ∈ {1, 0}, i = 1, 2, . . . , N }
. Let Nj is the set of tasks labeled by annotator j, and Ri
is the set of annotators labeling task i. The task assignment
scheme can be represented by a bipartite graph where an
edge (i, j) denotes that the task i is labeled by the worker j.
The labeling results form a matrix Y ∈ {1, 0}N ×R . The goal
is to ﬁnd an optimal estimator Ẑ of the true labels Z given
the
observation Y, minimizing the average bit-wise error rate
1
i∈{1,2,...,N } prob[ẑi = zi ].
N
We model the accuracy of annotators separately on the
positive and negative examples (Raykar et al. 2010). If the
true label is one, the true positive rate T P j for the jth annotator is deﬁned as the probability that the annotator labels
it as one, i.e., T P j = p(yij = 1|zi = 1). On the other hand
if the true label is zero, the true negative rate T N j is deﬁned as the probability that annotator labels it as zero, i.e.,
T N j = p(yij = 0|zi = 0). Suppose we have the training
data set D = {xi , yi1 , . . . , yiR }N
i=1 with N instances from
R annotators, where xi ∈ X is an instance (typically a ddimensional feature vector), yij is the label (1 or 0) given
by the jth annotator. Considering the family of linear discriminating functions, the probability for the positive class is
modeled as a logistic sigmoid, i.e., p(y = 1|x, w) = σ(wT x),
where x, ω ∈ Rd , and σ(z) = 1+e1−z .
The task is to estimate the parameter w as well as the
true positive P = T P 1 , . . . , T P R  and the true negative
N = T N 1 , . . . , T N R . Let θ = {w, P, N }, the probability of training data D can be deﬁned by p(D|θ) =
N
1
R
i=1 p(yi , . . . , yi |xi , θ). The EM algorithm can be exploited to estimate the parameter θ by maximizing the loglikelihood of p(D|θ) (Raykar et al. 2010). Let μi = p(zi =
1|yi1 , . . . , yiR , xi , θ). We simply set the threshold as 0.5, i.e.,
if μi > 0.5, the value of ẑi is assigned with 1, otherwise 0.










	
	













Discussion and Conclusion
We propose to acquire knowledge about initial states and
action models from the crowd. Since the number of HITS
sent to the crowd related to initial states could be large, in the
future, we could consider how to reduce the number of HITS,
e.g. by exploiting backward chaining planning techniques –
which only might need to know small parts of the initial state,
rather than the whole state. In addition, we could also think
of ways of engaging the crowd in more active ways, rather
than answering yes/no to HITS. For example, we can give
them candidate plans and ask them to critique the plan and/or
modify them to make them correct. We then learn knowledge
from the modiﬁcation process and use it for computing plans.

Acknowledgements
Zhuo’s research is supported by NSFC (No. 61309011) and
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(No. 14lgzd06). Kambhampati’s research is supported in part
by a Google Research Award and the ONR grants N0001413-1-0176 and N00014-15-1-2027.

References
Manikonda, L.; Chakraborti, T.; De, S.; Talamadupula, K.; and
Kambhampati, S. 2014. AI-MIX: using automated planning to
steer human workers towards better crowdsourced plans. In IAAI,
3004–3009.
Raykar, V. C.; Yu, S.; Zhao, L. H.; Valadez, G. H.; Florin, C.; Bogoni,
L.; and Moy, L. 2010. Learning from crowds. JMLR 11:1297–1322.
Zhang, H.; Law, E.; Miller, R.; Gajos, K.; Parkes, D. C.; and Horvitz,
E. 2012. Human computation tasks with global constraints. In CHI,
217–226.
Zhuo, H. H., and Yang, Q. 2014. Action-model acquisition for
planning via transfer learning. Artif. Intell. 212:80–103.
Zhuo, H. H. 2015. Crowdsourced action-model acquisition for
planning. In AAAI, 3004–3009.

Experiment
Since the action model acquisition part has been evaluated
in the context of CAMA already (Zhuo 2015), here we focus
on evaluating the initial state acquisition part. We evaluated
our approach in three planning domains, i.e., blocks1 , depots2
and driverlog4 . We ﬁrst generated 150 planning problems
with complete initial states, denoted by P̄ . After that we
randomly removed propositions from the initial states in P̄
2


	



Reﬁning Initial States and Action Models: We reﬁne the
initial state and action models based on estimated true labels.
Once the initial state and action models reﬁned, we solve
the corresponding revised planning problem using an off-theshelf planner.

1





http://www.cs.toronto.edu/aips2000/
http://planning.cis.strath.ac.uk/competition/

7

