Automated Planning for Peer-to-peer Teaming and its
Evaluation in Remote Human-Robot Interaction
Vignesh Narayanan

Yu Zhang

Nathaniel Mendoza

Dept. of Computer Science
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ

Dept. of Computer Science
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ

Dept. of Computer Science
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ

vnaray15@asu.edu

yzhan442@asu.edu
Subbarao Kambhampati

namendoz@asu.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ

rao@asu.edu
ABSTRACT
Human factor studies on remote human-robot interaction
are often restricted to various forms of supervision, in which
the robot is essentially being used as a smart mobile manipulation platform with sensing capabilities. In this study,
we investigate the incorporation of a general planning capability into the robot to facilitate peer-to-peer human-robot
teaming, in which the human and robot are viewed as teammates that are physically separated. One intriguing question is to what extent humans may feel uncomfortable at
such robot autonomy and lose situation awareness, which
can potentially reduce teaming performance. Our results
suggest that peer-to-peer teaming is preferred by humans
and leads to better performance. Furthermore, our results
show that peer-to-peer teaming reduces cognitive loads from
objective measures (even though subjects did not report this
in their subjective evaluations), and it does not reduce situation awareness for short-term tasks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Human factors]; I.2.8 [Plan execution, formation, and generation]; J.7 [Command and control]

Keywords
Robot design principles; Autonomous robot capabilities; User
study/Evaluation; Teamwork & group dynamics

1.

INTRODUCTION

In supervised human-robot teaming, the human creates
the plan to achieve the global goal, and then either directly
provides motion commands or breaks the plan into sub-plans

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
HRI’15 Extended Abstracts, March 2–5, 2015, Portland, OR, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-3318-4/15/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2701973.2702042.

(or sub-goals) for the robot to handle. In peer-to-peer (P2P)
teaming, the human and robot share the same global goal
and collaborate to achieve it. While increasing robot autonomy is generally viewed as desirable, humans may feel
uncomfortable at the loss of control entailed by such autonomy in P2P teaming, which can potentially reduce situation
awareness for humans and affect teaming performance.
In this study,1 we mainly concentrate on remote interaction and perform our investigation for emergency response
in an urban search and rescue (USAR) task. Here, the task
cannot be fully specified a priori due to incomplete information about the models, goals or settings in such scenarios. Furthermore, information can be continuously changing
throughout the task and may not always be synchronized
between the human and robot (e.g., goal updates and human preference models) due to communication or interpretation delays. The goal of this USAR task is to explore
areas of the disaster scene to provide real-time information,
which is then used to aid the management team to create
rescue plans (e.g., identifying locations of casualties). The
aim of our study is to compare P2P and supervised teaming
in terms of objective measures as well as subjective measures
such as situation awareness and mental workload.
Related Work: In most previous works on human-robot
and human-machine interactions (e.g., [1]) for teaming, the
human always plays a supervisor role. While there are works
that incorporate general planning capabilities into robots to
achieve P2P teaming (e.g., [3]), as yet, there exists no empirical investigation of its influence on the teaming performance. In this study, we implement P2P teaming in which
the human and robot are viewed as teammates, and the
robot exhibits autonomy through automated planning capabilities. In terms of automation in human-robot interaction,
it is well known that it can have both positive and negative
effects on human performance [2].

2.

STUDY DESIGN

Fig. 1 presents the simulated environment and humanrobot interface used in our USAR task, which represents the
floor plan of an office building before a disaster occurs (e.g.,
1

A longer version at rakaposhi.eas.asu.edu/hri15-long.html.

Figure 1: Environment (left) and interface (right)
used in the USAR task with a simulated Nao robot.

Figure 2: Results for objective measures.

a fire). The study was performed over 4 weeks and involved
19 volunteers. Each subject took part in one experimental
trial of either P2P or supervised teaming. Both the human
subject and robot had access to the floor plan before the
disaster. The robot in P2P teaming could use the planning
capability (based on SapaReplan [3]) to independently create its own plan based on the floor plan and current status
of the task. In both teaming scenarios, the robot displayed
a list of applicable actions that it could perform given the
current state. The interaction interfaces were the same except that the robot in P2P teaming also recommended the
next action (from along the applicable ones) in its plan. The
global goal was to report the number of casualties in as many
rooms as possible in 20 minutes.
The incomplete task information was assumed to be a result of blocked doors. We provided the information regarding which doors might be blocked to the human subject,
but only after the task had run for 1 minute to simulate
dynamic information. This information, however, remained
unknown to the robot. The human subject could interact
with the robot at specific times to reduce the influence of
this information asymmetry, or the robot had to learn this
information by pushing the door and failing (which could
reduce the teaming performance).
In a real USAR task, the human would also have other
information to process and analyze. To simulate this, the
human subject was also assigned to a secondary task. This
secondary task involved solving three-dimensional spatial visualization puzzles. The performance of the team was evaluated on both the primary and secondary tasks. Each trial
ended when the given time elapsed. Finally, the human subject completed a questionnaire (in Likert scale) that included
questions for evaluating situation awareness, mental workload and other subjective human-robot interaction aspects.

3.

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS

The results for objective measures are presented in Fig. 2.
Overall, subjects in P2P teaming outperformed subjects in
supervised teaming in terms of the number of rooms visited

Figure 3: Results for subjective measures. ∗ denotes
p < 0.05, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗ denotes p < 0.001.
within 20 minutes and the secondary task performance (left
part of Fig. 2). In fact, performance for the primary task
in supervised teaming was no better than the robot with a
planning capability executing the task alone (i.e., P2P-NI).
Results for subjective measures as assessed by the survey
questionnaire are presented in Fig. 3. Our analysis on mental workload did not show any significant difference due to
the fact that most humans preferred to rely on themselves at
the beginning even in P2P teaming, which might be a result
of the lack of trust in the robot for handling the task initially.
This effect can be seen from the right part of Fig. 2, which
shows how many robot recommended actions were followed
by the human subjects in P2P teaming. Even though the
workload was seen to be almost the same based on subjective
measures (Fig. 3), the objective measures suggest that the
cognitive load was indeed reduced (based on the time spent
on the secondary task (left part of Fig. 2)). Our analysis on
situational awareness did not show any significant difference
either. This might be partially due to the fact that the recommended action of the robot from the planning capability
during execution provided situation awareness to the human
subject, since the same action would likely be chosen by the
subject in the same situation. This is interesting since it suggests that humans in P2P teaming can maintain situation
awareness, at least for short-term tasks such as our USAR
task. Our analysis on likability, improvability, and complacency showed that the subjects generally preferred and felt
more satisfied working with the robot in P2P teaming.
Our conclusions from this preliminary study are
that humans prefer working with robots with a planning capability for P2P teaming, and the planning
capability helps reduce cognitive load and maintain
situation awareness for short-term tasks.
Acknowledgments: This research is supported in part by
the ARO grant W911NF-13-1-0023, and the ONR grants
N00014-13-1-0176 and N00014-13-1-0519.

4.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Casper and R. Murphy. Human-robot interactions
during the robot-assisted urban search and rescue
response at the world trade center. IEEE Trans. on
SMC Part B, 33(3):367–385, June 2003.
[2] R. Parasuraman. Designing automation for human use:
empirical studies and quantitative models. Ergonomics,
43(7):931–951, 2000. PMID: 10929828.
[3] K. Talamadupula, J. Benton, S. Kambhampati,
P. Schermerhorn, and M. Scheutz. Planning for
human-robot teaming in open worlds. ACM Trans.
Intell. Syst. Technol., 1(2):14:1–14:24, Dec. 2010.

